# Docosahexaenoic acid attenuates breast cancer cell metabolism and the Warburg phenotype by targeting bioenergetic function

### Abstract

Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6_n_−3) depresses mammary carcinoma proliferation and growth in cell culture and in animal models. The current study explored the role of interrupting bioenergetic pathways in BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines representing respiratory and glycolytic phenotypes, respectively and comparing the impacts of DHA with a non-transformed cell line, MCF-10A. Metabolic investigation revealed that DHA supplementation significantly diminished the bioenergetic profile of the malignant cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. DHA enrichment also resulted in decreases in hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) total protein level and transcriptional activity in the malignant cell lines but not in the non-transformed cell line. Downstream targets of HIF-1α, including glucose transporter 1 (GLUT 1) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), were decreased by DHA treatment in the BT-474 cell line, as well as decreases in LDH protein level in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. Glucose uptake, total glucose oxidation, glycolytic metabolism, and lactate production were significantly decreased in response to DHA supplementation; thereby enhancing metabolic injury and decreasing oxidative metabolism. The DHA-induced metabolic changes led to a marked decrease of intracellular ATP levels by 50% in both cancer cell lines, which mediated phosphorylation of metabolic stress marker, AMPK, at Thr172. These findings show that DHA contributes to impaired cancer cell growth and survival by altering cancer cell metabolism, increasing metabolic stress and altering HIF-1α-associated metabolism, while not affecting non-transformed MCF-10A cells. This study provides rationale for enhancement of current cancer prevention models and current therapies by combining them with dietary sources, like DHA. (C) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.














































### INTRODUCTION

Breast cancer is the second highest cause for cancer-related mortality in the United States, and over 230,000 women were estimated to be diagnosed in 2013 alone [1]. Metabolic analysis of cancer cells has recently come into focus [2, 3], although it has been almost a century since Warburg's initial findings that cancer cells exhibit a glycolytic phenotype over oxidative metabolism [4]. The functional state of mitochondria plays a critical role in carcinogenic invasion and metastasis because it has been shown to help stabilize the Warburg phenotype [5].

The metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells has been shown to be dependent on the activity of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway, mainly HIF-1α, which mediates the adaptation of cells under hypoxic conditions [6, 7]. Once stabilized, HIF-1α transcriptionally regulates the expression of over 1000 target genes, including genes responsible for regulation of cancer cell metabolism [8, 9]. Breast cancer patient biopsies have demonstrated a correlation of poor prognosis [10], tumor aggressiveness [11], and early relapse [12] with increased HIF-1α protein levels. With the focus on cancer cell metabolism, dietary factors and inhibitors of glycolysis, molecular targets such as HIF-1α, are being widely studied to treat or enhance the effectiveness of other therapeutics in the treatment of cancer [3, 13].

Dietary _n_−3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have been suggested to have anti-cancer properties, and the effects on cancer cell metabolism presents another possible mechanism for inhibiting cancer survival and progression [14]. Recent studies have shown that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) isoforms α [15] and γ [16] can alter cancer cell growth and survival and that PPAR receptor activity can be modified by PUFAs [17, 18]. While differential changes in PPAR γ activities have been reported for both different classes of _n_−6 and _n_−3 PUFAs [19], multiple studies have demonstrated that DHA can modify PPAR levels of isoforms α [15, 20] and γ [21, 22]. While _n_−3 PUFAs, including eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA; C20:5_n_−3) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6_n_−3), can alter activities of HIF-1α [23], HIF-1α activity has been shown to be modified by PPARα as well [24], though the effect of _n_−3 PUFAs on HIF-1α expression is still not well characterized and the changes in HIF-1α-associated metabolism by _n_−3 PUFAs have not been fully elucidated.

In the current study, we hypothesized that DHA will decrease oxidative metabolism and alter HIF-1α regulation on downstream metabolism. In order to test this hypothesis and compare the impact of DHA supplementation on the bioenergetic signature of cancer cells, two metabolically distinct breast cancer cell lines were employed (1) BT-474, with a mitochondrially active phenotype, and (2) MDA-MB-231, with a glycolytically active phenotype. A non-transformed breast epithelial MCF-10A cell line was also examined as a control. Together, the data presented herein demonstrate that _n_−3 PUFA supplementation alters cancer bioenergetic function and HIF-1α-associated metabolism, suggesting that supplementation with _n_−3 PUFAs could enhance current therapies and lead to new approaches in the treatment of cancer.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Cell Lines and Reagents

BT-474 mammary ductal carcinoma cells, MDA-MB-231 mammary adenocarcinoma cells, and MCF-10A non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Fatty acids, linoleic acid (LA; C18:2_n_−6) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6_n_−3) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO) and dissolved in ethanol (EtOH), flushed with nitrogen gas, protected from light and stored at −20°C for no more than 60 d.

#### Cell Culture

BT-474 cells were maintained in HybriCare (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone, Logan, UT). MDA-MB-231 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 (Thermo Scientific, Rochester, NY) supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone, Logan, UT). MCF-10A cells were maintained in DMEM/F12 (Thermo Scientific, Rochester, NY) supplemented with 5% FBS (Hyclone). Cells were grown as monolayers at 37°C in a humidified environment with 5% CO2.

#### Integrated Cellular Metabolism Assays

As previously described [25, 26], basal oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were measured in the Seahorse XF-96 Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience, Billerica, MA). 1.0 × 104 cells/well of BT-474, MDA-MB-231, or MCF-10A were seeded in 100 µL of cell culture medium at 37°C overnight prior to treatment with specified PUFAs or an equal volume of EtOH. The plates were then treated for 48 h prior to the experiment. The conditioned media was aspirated and cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The cells were then equilibrated with assay media lacking sodium bicarbonate at 37°C for 30 min in an incubator lacking CO2. Basal OCR was measured followed by four treatments of glycolytic and mitochondrial inhibitors: 2-deoxy-D-glucose, oligomycin, carbonyl cyanide 4-trifluoromethoxy-phenylhydrazone (FCCP), and antimycin A. Measurements were standardized to protein concentration in each well. A minimum of four wells were utilized per treatment group and data represent at least _n_ = 3 independent experiments ± SD.

#### Cell Viability Assay

Cells were trypsinized and counted using trypan blue stain and a hemocytometer. Unstained cells were counted as viable.

#### HIF Luciferase Assay

Cells were transfected with 100 ng of HIF Cignal™ reporter construct (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). After 6 h of transfection, medium was changed with the addition of either 100 µM of DHA, LA or an equal volume of EtOH and cells were incubated for 24 h. Cells were then treated with 50 µM Cobalt Chloride (CoCl2) for 24 h and then harvested for reporter gene assays. Dual Luciferase assay (Promega, Madison, WI) was performed following manufacturer protocol, and promoter activity values were expressed as relative units.

#### Immunoblotting

As described previously [27], cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed using GTP-lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 15 mM NaCl, 6 mM sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA] containing freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000_g_ for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were analyzed for protein concentration using Bio-Rad's DC assay (Hercules, CA). Samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to either nitrocellulose or Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and probed with specific antibodies. Detection was performed using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and visualized with ECL (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Specific antibodies were purchased for pAMPK (1:1000), 5′ AMP-activated protein (AMPK; 1:1000), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 1:2000; Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA), glucose transporter 1 (GLUT 1; 1:1000; EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA), HIF-1α (1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX), and β-actin (1:5000; Abcam, Cambridge, MA).

#### Glucose Uptake

Measurements of glucose uptake was done as previously described [28] with modification. Briefly, an equal number of cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and allowed to settle for 24 h before specific treatments. At the end of specified treatment times, the cells were standardized using viable cell counts. 5 × 105 cells were washed once with warmed (37°C) PBS prior to resuspension in 500 µL Krebs-Ringer HEPES buffer (KRBH) with 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.5 mM glucose and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Resuspension media was removed and 250 µL of KRBH/0.5%BSA/0.5 mM glucose containing 1 µCi of 2-deoxy-D-3H-glucose (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) was added each sample and incubated for 5 min at 37°C. Following incubation, media was removed and samples were placed on ice before washing three times with ice-cold PBS containing 5 mM glucose. Cells were collected by centrifugation and the cell pellet was solubilized in 0.1 M NaOH. The samples were placed into 4 mL scintillation vials with 2 mL of Ecolite (+)™ liquid scintillation cocktail (MP Biochemicals, Santa Ana, CA) and radioactivity was measured by a Tri-Carb 2900TR (Packard Instrument Company, Meriden, CN) liquid scintillation analyzer.

#### Glycolysis Measurement

Measurements of glucose usage through glycolysis was done as previously described [29, 30] with slight modification. Briefly, an equal number of cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and allowed to settle for 24 h before specific treatments. At the end of specified treatment times, the cells were standardized using viable cell counts. 1 × 106 cells were washed once with warmed (37°C) PBS prior to resuspension in 250 µL Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Two hundred fifty microliter of HBSS containing 8 mM glucose and 5 µCi of 5-3H-glucose (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) were added to each sample and incubated in a shaking H2O bath at 90 rpm for 1 h at 37°C. Following incubation, samples were taken in triplicate and 100 µL were transferred to uncapped 0.25 mL PCR tubes containing an equal volume of 0.2 N HCl. 0.5 mL of H2O was added to the outside of the PCR tubes not allowing the H2O and the contents of the PCR tubes to mix. The vials were sealed and diffusion was allowed to occur for a minimum of 24 h. The samples were then placed into 4 mL scintillation vials with 2 mL of Ecolite (+)™ liquid scintillation cocktail (MP Biochemicals, Santa Ana, CA). The amounts of diffused and undiffused 3H were determined by scintillation counting on a Tri-Carb 2900TR (Packard Instrument Company, Meriden, CT). Appropriate 3H-glucose-only and 3H2O-only controls were included, enabling the calculation of 3H2O in each sample to calculate the rate of glycolysis, as described previously [31].

#### Total Glucose Oxidation Measurement

Glucose oxidation measurements were done as previously described [32] with slight modification. Briefly, an equal number of cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and allowed to settle for 24 h before specific treatments. At the end of specified treatment times, the cells were standardized using viable cell counts. Fully oxygenated incubation media (KRB-HEPES with 0.12 M sodium bicarbonate) with O2:CO2 (95:5) and adjusted to pH 7.4 was prepared prior to the addition of 0.1 µCi per flask U-14C-glucose (33.3 µCi/mmol of substrate; PerkinElmer) and 1 mM D-glucose. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 0.5 mL of cell suspension (1 × 107 viable cells) in flasks with sealed caps fitted with a suspended center well containing filter paper and incubated for 90 min at 37°C. The reactions were acidified by the addition of 0.2 mL of concentrated perchloric acid (HClO4) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Zero minute metabolic production rates for each sample were prepared by the addition of cell suspension followed immediate acidification with HClO4. After incubations were terminated, center wells were filled with 0.3 mL of benzethonium hydroxide (C27H43NO3; Sigma) to capture CO2 and were allowed to sit at room temperature for 1 h. Center wells were placed in scintillation vials and filled with 4 mL of Ecolite (+)™ liquid scintillation cocktail (MP Biochemicals, Santa Ana, CA) before scintillation counting on a Tri-Carb 2900TR (Packard Instrument Company, Meriden, CN). Matched set of experiments were used for analysis of lactate production.

#### Lactate Assay

Absorbance based Lactate Assay Kit II (Biovision, Milpitas, CA) was used following the manufacturer protocol. Briefly, an equal number of cells were seeded in six-well plates and allowed to settle for 24 h before specific treatments. At the end of the specified treatment times, the cells were standardized using viable cell counts. The cells were then mixed with the respective kit reaction mixtures and were allowed to sit at room temperature for 30 min before being read at OD450 nm on a SpectraMax M5 machine (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). The kit allows for the quantification of the amount of L (+)-lactate in the samples by generating a product which interacts with a probe to produce color (_λ_max = 450 nm).

#### ATP Assay

The ATPLite kit (PerkinElmer) kit was used per manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, cells were plated in six-well plates and allowed to settle for 24 h before addition of 100 µM PUFA or an equal volume of EtOH control for 48 h. Cells were counted and an equal number of viable cells were plated in 96-well plates (black-well) prior to the addition of cell lysis solution followed by the substrate solution added and being read for luminescence on a SpectraMax M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices LLC, Sunnyvale, CA). The relative luminescence presented is standardized to EtOH control.

#### Statistical Analysis

All experimental results were independently repeated at least three times. All quantitative data shown represent the compiled data as percentages versus control treatments with error bars representing standard deviation and statistical analyses were performed using the Student's _t_-test and/or ANOVA with the Tukey method for pairwise comparison on SAS® software with values of at least _P_ &lt; 0.05 being considered significant.

### RESULTS

#### DHA Supplementation Attenuates the Bioenergetic Signature of Cancer Cells

New reports have shown changes in mitochondrial function in response to dietary fish oil in colon cancer cells [33], however the effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) on glycolytic and mitochondrial metabolism have not been evaluated. Two metabolically distinct breast cancer cell lines BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 and a non-transformed MCF-10A cell line were used to examine time- and dose-dependent metabolic assessments in response to PUFA supplementation using Seahorse XF-96 analyzer (Billerica, MA). Basal extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) and basal mitochondrial respiration were calculated simultaneously (Figure 1A). Significant decreases in glycolytic and mitochondrial metabolism were observed in a dose-dependent manner in response to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6_n_−3) supplementation in both BT-474 (Figure 1B) and MDA-MB-231 (Figure 1C) cells, but not in MCF-10A cells (Figure 1D). In the MDA-MB-231, a low oxygen consumer and more glycolytically active cell line, DHA significantly decreased basal ECAR by over 60% (Figure 2A) and basal OCR was decreased by 80% compared to control (Figure 2B). Similarly, in the BT-474 cell line, a higher oxygen consumer and more mitochondrially active, DHA significantly decreased basal OCR by 70% versus control (Figure 2B). Additionally, DHA treatments inhibited the rate of coupled respiration, ATP production, by over 70% in both cancer cell lines compared to control (Figure 2C).

Figure 1\. DHA alters the bioenergetic profiles of breast cancer cells. (A) OCR model used for integrated extracellular metabolism assays. Successive injections of oligomycin, FCCP, and antimycin A were initiated for specified cell lines. Specified concentrations of DHA were treated for 48 h in the (B) BT-474, (C) MDA-MB-231 and (D) MCF-10A cell lines prior to OCR assessment. All experiments were done in quadruplicate and represent at least n = 3 ± SD.


Figure 2\. DHA modifies mitochondrial capacity in breast cancer cells. Indicated cell lines were treated with 25, 50, 75, and 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA) or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h prior to ECAR and OCR assessment. (A) Estimate of cellular basal ECAR. Data represents ECAR (pmole/min/mg protein). (B) Estimate of cellular basal OCR. Data represents OCR (pmole/min/mg protein). (C) Estimate of the proportion of basal OCR coupled to ATP synthesis. (D) Estimate of the potential maximal respiratory capacity. (E) Estimate of available respiratory capacity to cells. All experiments were done in quadruplicate and represent at least n = 3 ± SD. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 25 µM DHA. #_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 50 µM DHA. Redundant symbols were not shown.


To further identify the impact of DHA on the bioenergetic capacity of the mitochondria, maximal respiration, and spare respiratory capacity were calculated (Figure 1A) [34]. Again, large decreases in the maximal respiration and respiratory capacity of the mitochondria in the breast cancer cells were observed with decreases over 80% in cells treated with 100 µM DHA (Figure 2D and E, respectively). No differences in the non-mitochondrial respiration were observed and all data are summarized in (Supplementary Table S1). Although DHA dose-dependently affected cancer cell metabolism, 100 µM DHA induced the greatest metabolic change and was therefore used for subsequent experiments. Combined, these data suggest that DHA can induce mitochondrial injury supported by the significant changes in oxidative metabolism. Interestingly, the bioenergetic profile changes induced by DHA seem to be specific to cancer cells.

#### DHA Negatively Regulates HIF-1α-Associated Metabolism

Dietary LA has been shown to enhance mammary tumor progression [35, 36] and high levels have shown to increase carcinogenesis in breast cancer [37]. To determine the effect of DHA on cancer metabolism, characterization of metabolism regulated by HIF-1α in response to PUFA treatment was assessed. While there were no changes to HIF-1α protein level with LA treatment in BT-474, decreases of HIF-1α protein level in MDA-MB-231 were observed. However, the PUFA-induced decreases of HIF-1α protein level were not as significant as DHA treatment in both BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 compared to control (Figure 3A). Densitometry analysis showed significant decreases in HIF-1α protein levels (Figure 3B). This led us to assess the effect of DHA on HIF-1α transcriptional activity. CoCl2, a known chemical inducer of HIF-1α, was used as a positive control. DHA treatment significantly decreased HIF-1α transcriptional activity as well as prevented the induction of HIF-1α with CoCl2 in both BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines (Figure 3C). Further investigation found downregulation of downstream transcriptional targets of HIF-1α, GLUT 1, and LDH, which are key components of the Warburg phenotype (Figure 4A). Densitometry analysis revealed significant DHA-induced downregulation of GLUT 1 and LDH protein levels in the BT-474 cell line (Figure 4B). High basal expression of GLUT 1, independent of HIF-1α activity, prevented any significant DHA-induced change in the MDA-MB-231 cell line. However, LDH levels were significantly decreased with DHA treatment (Figure 4A and B). Taken together, these data suggest that DHA is altering HIF-1α-associated metabolism and the Warburg phenotype.

Figure 3\. DHA decreases HIF-1α protein levels and modifies HIF-1α activity in breast cancer cells. An equal number of cells were treated with 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before harvesting for immunoblot analysis. (A) Immunoblot analysis showing HIF-1α expression levels in BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Total β-actin was used as a loading control. (B) Percentage densitometry analysis of HIF-1α in BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines standardized to β-actin and relative to control. All experiments represent at least _n_ = 3 and densitometry analysis represents mean ± SD. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs LA. Redundant symbols were not shown. (C) BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with 100 ng of HIF Cignal™ reporter construct. After 6 h of transfection, medium was changed with the addition of 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before harvesting the cells for reporter gene assays. Dual Luciferase assay was performed and promoter activity values are expressed as relative units standardized to Renilla luciferase. All experiments represent at least _n_ = 3 and the percentage relative luciferase activity is represented as mean ± SD. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control + CoCl2. #_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs DHA. Redundant symbols were not shown.


Figure 4\. Changes in protein levels of HIF-1α downstream targets in response to PUFA treatment. Treatment of 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before harvesting cells for immunoblot analysis. (A) Immunoblot analysis showing GLUT 1 and LDH expression levels in BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Total β-actin was used as a loading control. Percentage densitometry analysis GLUT 1 and LDH in (B) BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines standardized to β-actin and relative to control. All experiments represent at least _n_ = 3\. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control.


#### Decreases in Glucose Metabolism and the Pasteur Effect in Cancer Cells in Response to DHA Treatment

To define the extent of the effect of DHA on HIF-1α-associated metabolism, glucose metabolism was assessed. Glucose uptake was measured by uptake of 2-deoxy-D-3H-glucose (3H-2-DG) in the BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cell lines. Dose-dependent decreases in 3H-2-DG uptake were observed in response to DHA supplementation in both cancer cell lines, but not in the non-transformed cell line (Figure 5A). Despite the high basal levels of GLUT 1 protein in MDA-MB-231, glucose uptake was significantly decreased with DHA treatment (Figure 5A).

Figure 5\. DHA attenuates glucose metabolism and lactate production of breast cancer cells. (A) Indicated cell lines were treated with 12.5, 25, 50, 75, 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA) or a control volume of EtOH for 48 h before 5 min incubation with 3H-2-DG. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 12.5 µM DHA. #_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 25 µM DHA. +_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 50 µM DHA. (B) 5-3H-glucose analysis showing rate of diffused 3H2O (rate of glycolysis). Indicated cell lines were treated with 12.5, 25, 50, 75, 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA) or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before incubation with 5-3H-Glucose. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 12.5 µM DHA. #_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 25 µM DHA. +_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 50 µM DHA. $_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs 75 µM DHA. (C) U-14C-Glucose analysis showing percentage of 14CO2 production (glucose oxidation) relative to control. Indicated cell lines were treated with 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before incubation with U-14C-Glucose. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs LA. (D) BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cell lines were treated with 100 µM DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h before total lactate concentration was analyzed by absorbance method and data represents lactate production (µM). All experiments were done in triplicate and represent at least _n_ = 3 independent experiments ± SD. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs LA. Redundant symbols were not shown.


Next, total glycolytic rate was examined by measuring the conversion of 5-3H-glucose to 3H2O in response to DHA supplementation. DHA treatment in BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cells led to rapid dose-dependent decreases in glucose metabolism compared to control (Figure 5B). Identical treatments in the non-transformed MCF-10A cell line showed no significant changes of glucose usage at high concentrations of DHA, but low concentrations significantly increased glucose usage in MCF-10A cells (Figure 5B). Total glucose oxidation was then evaluated by measuring total 14CO2 produced from U-14C-glucose in cells treated with DHA. Similarly, decreases in total glucose oxidation in response to DHA and LA treatment were observed (Figure 5C). Notably, basal lactate production was much greater in the MDA-MB-231 cell line, confirming the ECAR findings and showing that the MDA-MB-231 cells have a greater glycolytic phenotype compared to the other cell lines. Moreover, DHA treatment significantly decreased total lactate production in the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, indicating that DHA plays a role in downregulating total glycolytic metabolism in cancer cells (Figure 5D).

#### Inhibition of Cancer Cell Metabolism Leads to Decreased Intracellular ATP Levels and Increased Metabolic Stress Upon Supplementation With DHA

In combination with decreased cellular metabolism, follow-up experiments to determine the effect of DHA treatment on total ATP production and metabolic stress were conducted. Significant decreases in total intracellular ATP levels in response to DHA supplementation in the cancer lines BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 were observed, but not in the MCF-10A cell line (Figure 6A). To determine if the DHA-induced decreased levels of ATP were adequate to induce metabolic stress, phospho-Thr172-AMPKα level was examined. Indeed, increased levels of phospho-Thr172-AMPKα in both BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cells were observed in response to DHA treatment. However, no changes were observed in total AMPKα levels (Figure 6B). Densitometry analysis indicated a significant increase in phospho-Thr172-AMPKα levels, thus the depletion of intracellular ATP levels by DHA was associated with increased metabolic stress in human breast cancer (Figure 6C).

Figure 6\. DHA decreases total intracellular ATP levels and increases metabolic stress in breast cancer. (A) BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cells were treated with 100 µM of DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA) or an equal volume of ethanol (EtOH) for 48 h. Standardized viable cell counts were placed in black-well plates and analyzed using the ATPLite kit by adding first a cell lysis solution followed by a luminescent substrate. Luminescence was quantified on a SpectraMax M5 plate reader. The relative luminescence presented is standardized to EtOH control. _P_ &lt; 0.001 vs control. All experiments were done in triplicate and represent at least n = 3 ± SD. (B) Immunoblot analysis of BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cells that were treated with 100 µM of DHA (_n_−3 PUFA), LA (_n_−6 PUFA), or an equal volume of EtOH for 48 h assessing AMPKα expression and AMPKα phosphorylation at Thr172, a marker indicating metabolic stress. Total AMPKα protein was measured and β-actin was used as a loading control. (C) Percentage densitometry analysis of p-Thr172-AMPKα in BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-10A cell lines standardized to total AMPKα and relative to control. All experiments represent at least _n_ = 3 and densitometry analysis represents mean ± SD. _P_ &lt; 0.05 vs control. !_P_ &lt; 0.05 vs LA. Redundant symbols were not shown.


### DISCUSSION

The fate of cancer cell metabolism is primarily regulated by the HIF pathway, specifically HIF-1, which has been postulated to be responsible for the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells [9]. Metabolic reprogramming by the HIF pathway aids in the survival of cells undergoing extreme conditions [38, 39]. More specifically, the transition from oxidative to glycolytic metabolism in breast cancer is stabilized by the alpha isoform of HIF-1 (HIF-1α) [40]. Although the HIFs are tightly regulated, increases in mutations often lead to HIF-1α accumulation, which have correlated with poor prognosis [41]. The studies reported herein demonstrate that DHA, an _n_−3 dietary fatty acid, can decrease the bioenergetic function of breast cancer cells and diminish metabolic reprogramming, which we propose is through the decreases of HIF-1α activity and expression.

The complex actions of _n_−3 PUFAs are numerous [14] and the effects reported here and by others in cancer prevention and carcinogenesis are positive [42]. The phenotypic differences in metabolism between the BT-474, a mitochondrial active phenotype, and the MDA-MB-231, a glycolytically active phenotype, cell lines are represented by the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rate (OCR) experiments (Figure 2A and B, respectively). The comparison between the distinct phenotypes provided an opportunity to identify the efficacy of _n_−3 PUFAs in multiple metabolic pathways. Dose-dependent treatment of DHA resulted in significant decreases in overall OCR, mitochondrial bioenergetic function, in combination with decreased ECAR, glycolytic activity (Figure 2A-E). The independent assessments of glucose metabolism were significantly inhibited in response to DHA in the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, but no effect was observed in the MCF-10A non-transformed cell line, suggesting that DHA may be selectively targeting malignant cell lines (Figure 3A-D). Our laboratory has shown preferential incorporation of DHA into xenografts compared to control tissue [43], which may be a possible explanation to the selective action of DHA on malignant cell lines.

The DHA-induced decreases in both glycolytic activity and mitochondrial respiration were unexpected. It has been postulated that decreases in HIF-1α activity in cells that display the Warburg phenotype would result in augmented mitochondrial activity, although the cancer cells enriched with DHA caused an opposite response. These observations may be due to the remodeling of the mitochondrial phospholipid composition, where _n_−3 PUFAs have been shown to alter mitochondrial structure and function [44]. More recent findings have reported that dietary fish oil can induce uncoupled respiration (proton leak) in colon cancer cells in mice undergoing chronic oxidative stress [33]. Other similar reports have shown that DHA can increase mitochondrial damage in cancer cells through accumulation into mitochondrial cardiolipin (CL) [44, 45], which can lead to cytochrome c release and apoptosis [46, 47]. Conversely, the effects of DHA on mitochondrial function is diverse among cell types and enrichment of DHA into mitochondrial CL has been shown to have protective effects in normal cells [44]. Additionally, DHA has been shown to delay mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) opening and mitochondrial Ca2+ flux [44]. The findings reported herein suggest that DHA may be modifying the mitochondrial phospholipid composition and altering the activity of essential inner membrane proteins and channels resulting in diminished overall bioenergetic capacity of the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines.

Interestingly, LA supplementation decreased HIF-1α protein level (Figure 3B) in MDA-MB-231 and decreased total oxidation of glucose in both BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 (Figure 5C). These results were unanticipated and have not been previously reported. However, a recent study from our laboratory has identified a unique mechanism for LA-induced tumorigenesis [36], which may explain why the LA-induced effects were not universal. On the other hand, significant decreases in HIF-1α protein level in response to DHA supplementation was diminished in both malignant cell lines. While these differences for treatment pertaining to the type of PUFA were inconsistent and did not register for all of the experiments or cell lines, DHA has been reported to induce changes in the transcriptional levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs). Recently, PPARα activation was shown to suppress HIF-1α signaling by increasing degradation of HIF-1α protein [24]. Therefore the possibility of DHA inducing degradation of HIF-1α protein through activation of PPARα expression cannot be ruled out [15, 24]. However, decreases in ATP have shown to attenuate heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) function, a molecular chaperone responsible for the proper folding of HIF-1α [48]. Large decreases of intracellular ATP levels can disrupt HSP90 function for proper folding and stabilization of its client proteins [49] (Figure 7). We propose that the observed decreases in HIF-1α protein levels may also be due to a dysfunctional HSP90 complex, resulting from the large decreases of intracellular ATP levels in DHA treated cells (Figure 6A). Moreover, DHA supplementation prevented HIF-1α induction with CoCl2 treatment, suggesting that there may be multiple mechanisms where DHA is inducing changes to the transcriptional activity of HIF-1α.

Figure 7\. DHA attenuates bioenergetic function and Warburg metabolism through HIF-1α. Proposed mechanism of the effect of DHA on malignant cells. DHA induces degradation of HIF-1α protein through activated PPARα or through hypothesized HSP90 deregulation (dashed line). DHA-induced downregulation of HIF-1α transcriptional activity leads to diminished bioenergetic function in breast cancer cells.


In addition to the anti-cancer effects of DHA, results presented here show that DHA decreased LDH protein levels and lactate production, which was decreased by over 60% in BT-474 and 50% in MDA-MB-231 cell lines (Figure 3D). Although the results may show high lactate concentrations due to the Crabtree Effect, a phenomenon originally found in yeast, where high extracellular glucose concentrations results in the production of lactate while simultaneously reducing mitochondrial metabolism [50]. The DHA-induced decreases in lactate concentration may be adequate enough to efficiently reduce the negative effects of high lactate production in cells containing a high glycolytic phenotype, indicating a possible protective effect to the surrounding tissue and may allow DHA to be used as an anti-invasive therapy, a hypothesis that has not been previously described.

These data as well as the metabolic data support the hypothesis that DHA coordinates integrated targeting of major signal-transduction pathways and metabolism in parallel (Figure 7). Furthermore, DHA has been shown to enhance efficacy in combination with chemotherapies [51], and results presented here may provide a new innovative strategy for combination therapies to target cancer cell metabolism. Typically, cellular sensing of metabolic stress is caused from the imbalance of the AMP/ATP ratio, which has been correlated to the total amount of cellular energy available. Increases in AMP/ATP ratio, usually by environmental stresses, result in the activation of AMPKα through post-translational modification by phosphorylation at Thr172 [52]. Other reports have shown increased autophagy in cells harboring wild-type p53 and increased phosphorylated AMPK in response to _n_−3 PUFAs [53]. These results demonstrate that the DHA-induced reduction of ATP levels led to a marked increase in the phosphorylation levels of AMPKα at Thr172 (Figure 6B and C), which suggest that cancer cells are undergoing metabolic stress in response to DHA supplementation and further confirms that DHA can inhibit mammary carcinoma survival and progression through metabolic deregulation. Taken together, this study identifies possible cancer prevention or anti-carcinogenic therapies targeting cancer cell metabolism by altering HIF-1α regulation. While HIF-1α may not be a specific target of DHA, these data provide new important metabolic insights into how dietary DHA modifies breast cancer survival and progression.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thank you to the MCW Cancer Center Bioenergetics Shared Resource, which is supported by Advancing a Healthier Wisconsin, for their help in conducting the bioenergetic experiments. All of the radioisotope experiments were made possible by Dr. Cynthia Mastick, who provided her laboratory and expertise to each experiment. We would also like to recognize and thank Eastern Star, the Women's Auxiliary of the Veterans of Foreign Wars and the Stout Foundation for their generous contributions and continuous support for this research.
