# Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (n-3 PUFAs) Decrease Growth and microRNA-21 Expression of Estrogen Receptor-Positive (ER+) MCF-7 Breast Cancer Cells

## Abstract

microRNA (miR)-21 plays a role in carcinogenesis and modulates genes regulating cell growth. Consumption of diets rich in the n-3 PUFA alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) in animals and humans results in elevations of serum ALA, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). Our objective was to determine _in vitro_ the effect of ALA, alone and combined with EPA and DHA (at levels found in serum of animals or humans fed ALA-rich diets) on growth of MCF-7 cells and miR-21 expression changes as an underlying mechanism. Cells were treated with 112μM fatty acids as either ALA alone, or with EPA and DHA at ratios found in serum of animals (AnR; 1:0.4:3.1) or humans (HuR; 1:1:2.5) or control (no PUFA) plus 1nM estrogen, 40μM oleic acid and 40μM linoleic acid. Cell growth was assessed after 24 and 48 hours treatment. miR-21 expression was analyzed by qPCR after 1 hour treatment. ALA reduced growth by 9% and 28% at 24 and 48 hours, respectively. AnR and HuR reduced cell growth by 82% and 37%, respectively, at 24 hours, and 37% for both at 48 hours. No change in growth was observed at 1 hour. miR-21 displayed 0.83-fold, 0.25-fold and 0.58-fold changes in expression for ALA, AnR and HuR, respectively, following 1 hour treatment, with AnR miR-21 significantly downregulated (p=0.0097) compared to control and ALA. A significant relationship was observed between fatty acid effects on miR-21 at 1 hour and cell growth at 24 hours (R2= 0.9980; p= 0.0231). AnR contained the highest level of DHA, suggesting it is most active in reducing cell growth via effects on miR-21. ALA, when combined with DHA and EPA reduces the growth of ER+ breast cancer cells potentially through early modulation of miR-21. Funding: NSERC. 