# S-(−)equol producing status not associated with breast cancer risk among low isoflavone consuming US postmenopausal women undergoing a physician recommended breast biopsy

## Abstract

Soy foods are the richest sources of isoflavones, mainly daidzein and genistein. Soy isoflavones are structurally similar to the steroid hormone 17_Î²_-estradiol and may protect against breast cancer. S-(−)equol, a metabolite of the soy isoflavone daidzein, has a higher bioavailability and greater affinity for estrogen receptor _Î²_ than daidzein. Approximately one-third of the Western population is able to produce S-(−)equol, and the ability is linked to certain gut microbes. We hypothesized that the prevalence of breast cancer, ductal hyperplasia, and overall breast pathology will be lower among S-(−)equol producing, as compared with nonproducing, postmenopausal women undergoing a breast biopsy. We tested our hypothesis using a cross-sectional study design. Usual diets of the participants were supplemented with 1 soy bar per day for 3 consecutive days. Liquid chromatography-multiple reaction ion monitoring mass spectrometry analysis of urine from 143 subjects revealed 25 (17.5%) as S-(−)equol producers. We found no statistically significant associations between S-(−)equol producing status and overall breast pathology (odds ratio [OR], 0.68; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.23-1.89), ductal hyperplasia (OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.20-3.41), or breast cancer (OR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.16-1.87). However, the mean dietary isoflavone intake was much lower (0.3 mg/d) than in previous reports. Given that the amount of S-(−)equol produced in the gut depends on the amount of daidzein exposure, the low soy intake coupled with lower prevalence of S-(−)equol producing status in the study population favors toward null associations. Findings from our study could be used for further investigations on S-(−)equol producing status and disease risk.