# Quercetin regulates β-catenin signaling and reduces the migration of triple negative breast cancer

### Abstract

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by a lack in estrogen, progesterone, and epidermal growth factor 2 receptors. TNBC exhibits most of the characteristics of basal-like and claudin-low breast cancer subtypes. The main contributor in the mortality of TNBC is due to the higher invasive and migratory ability of these tumor cells. Some plant flavonoids inhibit the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tumor cells and suppress cancer metastasis. In this study, we aimed to determine whether the flavonoid quercetin is effective in modulating the molecular signaling associated with EMT in TNBC. Our data indicated that quercetin can induce the expression of E-cadherin and also downregulate vimentin levels in TNBC. The ability of quercetin to modulate these EMT markers resulted in a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). Quercetin-induced MET was linked with the alteration of nuclear localization of β-catenin and modulation of β-catenin target genes such as cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Furthermore, we observed that quercetin induced the anti-tumor activity of doxorubicin by inhibiting the migratory ability of TNBC cells. These results suggested that quercetin may inhibit TNBC metastasis and also improve the therapeutic efficacy of existing chemotherapeutic drugs. (C) 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.



### INTRODUCTION

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) comprises approximately 10-30% of all breast cancers. It is characterized by the absence of estrogen, progesterone, and epidermal growth factor 2 receptors (EGFR2). Since these three receptors are the drug targets to treat breast cancer [1-3], current successful therapies such as hormone and antibody therapies are not effective to this patient population. Furthermore, "targeted therapy" for TNBC treatment has not yet been established due to the absence of identification of pathway specific targets [1, 2]. Current chemotherapy options are beneficial to the TNBC patient population and the response to chemotherapy is higher in compared to other breast cancer subtypes [4, 5]. However, the relapse rates are higher in first three years after treatment and chemotherapy resistance tend to develop, which causes reduction in the chemotherapy potential for TNBC treatment. The metastatic form of TNBC is very aggressive and treatment options are limited.

Better treatment options are needed that are less toxic, reduce the risk of disease progression, and are more targeted to this patient population. This is possible by identification of new targets or by detection of new novel molecules, which will inhibit the tumor proliferation and migration and diminish the drug resistance. Different promising areas of research are currently underway for the identification of newer biologic and targeted therapies for TNBC population, such as development of poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, EGFR inhibitors, and therapies that target cancer stem cells [6, 7].

Scientific research has focused recently on the anti-carcinogenic effect of different flavonoids [8-16]. Flavonoids are polyphenolic compounds in vegetables and fruits that can protect against the development and progression of breast cancer [8-10]. In particular, quercetin has been found to have anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties [11-13]. Quercetin is present in various fruits, vegetables, seeds, nuts, green tea, and red wine [14]. Studies have documented the anti-cancer activity of quercetin in various cancer cells [11-16]. Studies suggested that the biological activity of quercetin is exhibited by acting on multi targets. This anti-cancer activity has been attributed to different mechanisms, such as anti-oxidant activity, inhibition of enzymes that activate oncogenes, modification of signal transduction pathways, and interaction with different proteins enzymes and receptors [11-13]. Studies have also suggested that quercetin protects the toxic effect of doxorubicin or cisplatin-induced damages in cancer cell [17]. The mechanism of action of anti-carcinogenic activity of quercetin in TNBC is not yet elucidated. Most of the earlier studies elucidated the anti-proliferative effect of quercetin in various cancer cells [11-16]. However, few studies have pointed towards the anti-invasive efficacy of flavonoid quercetin in cancer cells [18, 19]. Flavonoids inhibit cancer metastasis by suppressing of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) secretion and reducing the angiogenesis [18]. A recent study suggested that addition of luteolin and quercetin in a human epidermal cancer cell line (A431-III) resulted in the inhibition of invadopodia formation and decrement of extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation [19]. But detailed studies have not yet been carried out to reveal how quercetin might inhibit invasive breast cancer cells.

Research has established that epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial mechanism for gaining the invasive and migratory ability of cancer cells. This phenomenon can be reversed by modulating the molecular signals involved in the formation of EMT [20, 21]. This reversal is called mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET). Various signaling molecules are involved in the transition between epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype. E-cadherin is one of the major signaling molecules that contribute to the maintenance of cell-cell adhesion. Cancer cells with less E-cadherin expression losses the adhesion properties of tumor that allows it to invade to near surrounding areas. β-catenin is another important structural component of the adhesion complex. E-cadherin/β-catenin binding is essential for the cells to adhere one another [22]. Most invasive breast carcinoma display lower expression levels of E-cadherin [23] and the phosphorylated active form of β-catenin in the nucleus [24]; this indicates that dissociation of E-cadherin/β-catenin complex may be a way to thwart TNBC. Researchers have identified different genes as downstream effectors of β-catenin, and of these, c-Myc and cyclin D1 are the main target genes. Myc is highly expressed in TNBC subtype, which influences the tumor growth, metastasis, and chemotherapy resistance [25]. Similarly cyclin D1 is highly expressed in various cancers, and higher levels of this gene are associated with poor prognosis of breast cancer [26]. Therefore, we were interested to learn about the effects of flavonoids on EMT process, β-catenin signaling and its target genes in TNBC.

Our present study describes the possible utilization of flavonoid compound against the higher EMT process that occurs in TNBC cells. We wanted to find out if exposure to quercetin resulted in higher expression levels of E-cadherin, which might lead to the decreased EMT process. Decreased nuclear localization of β-catenin by quercetin would further explain the action of quercetin in regulating the action of β-catenin in TNBC. We also wanted to find out if quercetin is able to decrease the expression levels of β-catenin target genes, such as cyclin D1 and c-Myc.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Cell Culture and Reagents

TNBC cells, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468, were purchased from ATCC. TNBC cells were grown in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. Quercetin and 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).

#### Cell Viability Assay

MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells were harvested during the logarithmic growth phase. To study the effects of quercetin on cell proliferation and viability, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells (5×103/well) were plated in 96-well plates for 24 h. Cells were washed once with medium and treated with different concentration of quercetin (0-100 μM) for 72 h. Then the cells were treated with 10 µl MTT (5 mg/mL) for 4 h. Subsequently, solubilization reagent was added and incubated the solution overnight to completely dissolve the purple precipitate obtained from MTT. Microplate reader was used to test the absorbance (A) of each well at 570 nm and average values were obtained.

#### Proliferation Assay

Actively growing MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell lines were seeded at a density of 2.5 × 104 cells in cell culture dishes and 24 h later, the cells were exposed to vehicle or different concentrations of quercetin. Cell proliferation was assessed every 24 h by counting viable cells using haemocytometer with Trypan blue staining. The cell counts were recorded and presented as a quantitative graphic representation.

#### Wound Healing Assay

MDA-MB-468 cells were cultured to approximately 90% confluent, a small pipette tip was used to make a scratch in the monolayer of vehicle or quercetin treated cells. Cell migration was captured using bright field microscope and quantified by measuring the unclosed area in the middle of the scratch after the cells migrates towards the center from both sides. Wound repair was calculated over control.

#### Migration and Invasion Assays

Quercetin treated (24 h) MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells (2.5×103) were seeded in Boyden chambers containing matrigel or no matrigel (BioCoat, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Complete growth medium was added to the wells as the chemo-attractant. Boyden chambers were placed in wells containing complete medium. The migrated/invaded cells on the lower surface of the membrane were counter stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Cells were scored with a fluorescent microscope and the images were taken at 20x magnification. Cell migration/invasion was calculated over control. Boyden chambers with matrigel were used for invasion and no matrigel were used for cell migration assays.

#### Immunofluorescence Analysis

Quercetin or vehicle treated cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS for 15 min, cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X100 for 5 min. Cells were blocked for 1 h using 5% goat serum contain 3% BSA. Then, cells were incubated with the primary antibodies for 1 h followed by incubation with the fluorochrome-labeled secondary antibody for 30 min at room temperature. Nuclei were stained with 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min. Membrane staining was carried out using wheat germ agglutinin. Slides were mounted with Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL) mounting medium and images were captured using Leica DMI 6000B fluorescence microscope.

#### Western Blot Analysis

Quercetin or vehicle treated cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (Peirce, Rockford, IL) containing protease inhibitor cocktail for mammalian cells (Peirce). Lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min and the protein concentration of supernatant (For E-cadherin and vimentin) was determined using the BCA assay kit (Pierce). For β-catenin experiment, cytosolic and nuclear fraction was prepared using Epiquick nuclear extraction kit (Epigentek, Farmingdale, NY). Equal amounts of protein were resolved by SDS-PAGE (BIO-RAD). Proteins were transferred nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore) by semi-dry transfer, blocked with 5% skim milk powder in PBS/0.1% Tween 20 and incubated overnight at 4°C with different diluted (1:1000) primary antibodies. Membranes were washed three times with PBST and then incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:10,000) for 1 h at room temperature. Visualization was performed by use of Amersham ECL plus Western blotting detection system (GE healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Chemiluminescence images were analyzed and densitometric measurements were carried out using the Image-J software (NIH).

#### Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) Analysis

Total RNA was isolated using Qiagen RNAeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Equal amount of RNA from quercetin or vehicle treated cells were reverse transcribed using Verzo cDNA kit (Thermoscientific, Waltham, MA). qRT-PCR was carried out using Taqman gene expression assay of E-cadherin, c-Myc and cyclin D1 (Life technologies, Waltham, MA).

#### Statistical Analyses

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 6.0) software (GraphPadPrism Software, Inc.). All the data were analyzed for statistical significance using Student's _t_-test/ one-way ANOVA. For all experiments, _P_ &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### RESULTS

#### Quercetin Decreased the Growth and Cell Survival of TNBC Cells

A considerable attention has been recently made to identify the anti-carcinogenic effect of different flavonoids [8-16]. However the mechanism of action of anti-carcinogenic activity of quercetin in TNBC is not yet elucidated. We used two TNBC cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468, for our studies. Initially, we investigated whether exposing these two cell lines to different concentrations of quercetin (0.01-100 μM) affected anti-proliferation activity. Quercetin significantly decreased the survival of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells in a dose dependent manner (Figure 1A). Further to study whether the decreased cell survival may be due to the decreased proliferation, cell growth analysis was carried out to assess the quercetin-dependent cell proliferation in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells in a time and dose dependent manner. The results obtained from the efficacy of quercetin on cell proliferation assay were consistent with its effect on cell survival data. Quercetin significantly inhibited the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells to a greater extent compared to vehicle treated control cells in different periods of the experiment (Figure 1B).

Figure 1\. Quercetin inhibits the growth and cell survival of TNBC cells. (A) MTT assay of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells treated with different concentrations of quercetin for 72 h, and (B) Growth curve of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells exposed to quercetin to various concentrations of quercetin. Each data represent the mean ± SD from three independent experiments _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


#### Quercetin Induced Change in Cell Morphology and Inhibited Cell Migration of TNBC Cells

Metastatic process of breast cancer is associated with rearrangement of cytoskeletal proteins and that result in cell morphology changes [27]. MDA-MB-468 cells are highly aggressive TNBC cells, and were used to analyze the efficacy of quercetin on the alteration of cellular morphology. Quercetin treatment changed the fibroblast spindle-like shape of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells to cobblestone epithelial phenotype (Figure 2A). This change in morphology was initiated by treating the cells with 10 μM quercetin for 24 h. This observation was very evident with 50 μM quercetin treatment in both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells. The morphological changes induced by quercetin were also observed when cells were cultured in higher density, indicating that change in cell shape in quercetin treated samples is not due to the cytotoxic effect of quercetin.

Figure 2\. Quercetin alters cell morphology and inhibits cell migration and invasion. (A) Bright field microscopic images of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells exposed to quercetin, (B) Microscopic images (_top panel_) and analysis (histogram, _bottom panel_) of wound healing assay in MDA-MB-468 cells treated with quercetin, and (C) Microscopic images (_top panel_) and analysis (histogram, _bottom panel_) of cell invasion assay of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 in response to quercetin. Each data represent the mean ± SD from three independent experiments and _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


The metastatic potential of breast cancer cells can be assessed by measuring cell motility [28]. The wound healing assay was used to measure the efficacy of quercetin on the motility of MDA-MB-468 cells. A wound was created by scratching confluent monolayers of MDA-MB-468 cells treated with quercetin (10 or 50 μM) or vehicle. Control cells repaired the wound within 24 h of culture, whereas quercetin treatment significantly (_P_ &lt; 0.01) reduced the wound healing cell compared to vehicle (Figure 2B). This experiment established that quercetin could interfere with the cell motility of TNBC.

To confirm this observation, we further carried out the invasion studies through the basement membrane. The invasive potential of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells treated with quercetin was analyzed in a Boyden chamber coated with extracellular matrix (matrigel) and using 10% FBS as a chemoattractant. MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells treated with quercetin for 24 h exhibited a significant (threefold, _P_ &lt; 0.01) decrease in the migration ability relative to vehicle-treated cells (Figure 2C). These results confirmed that the quercetin has a significant effect in inhibiting invasive ability of TNBC cells. Further, to examine the mechanism underlying the cell invasion and altering the mesenchymal morphology of TNBC, we analyzed the impact of quercetin on different signaling molecules in TNBC cells.

#### Quercetin Altered the Vimentin and E-Cadherin Expression Levels

The above data suggested that quercetin is able to alter the spindle-shaped mesenchymal morphology of MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells to epithelial phenotype. Vimentin is generally used as an EMT marker, and during MET, vimentin protein and mRNA expression is downregulated [29]. Experiments were carried out to analyze whether quercetin is able to down regulate the vimentin expression level in MDA-MB-231 cells. As expected, Western blot analysis revealed a significant decrease in the vimentin protein expression level (Figure 3A). Immunofluorescence analysis was also carried out to measure the vimentin expression level and the proper visualization of mesenchymal transition to epithelial morphology. The lesser fluorescence in the quercetin treated sample indicated that the expression level of vimentin is significantly lower compared to the control (Figure 3B). The transition of spindle shaped mesenchymal phenotype to cobblestone epithelial cell morphology by quercetin treatment was very evident from immunofluorescence analysis.

Figure 3\. Quercetin regulated EMT markers. (A) Western blot analysis of vimentin and E-cadherin in quercetin (10 and 50 μM) treated (48 h) MDA-MB-231 cells. Histogram shows the densitometric analysis of relative expression levels of E-cadherin or vimentin to β-actin, (B) Immunofluorescence analysis of MDA-MB-231 cells treated with quercetin (50 μM) for 48 h. Cells were stained with vimentin antibody (green), DAPI (blue) and wheat germ agglutinin [WGA] (red), and (C) mRNA expression levels of E-cadherin in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with 10 μM or 50 μM quercetin for 48 h was determined by qRT-PCR using Taqman gene expression assay system. Histograms represent the relative mRNA expression level of E-cadherin normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels. Error bars represent standard deviation of three independent experiments and _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


Loss of expression of epithelial adherence junction protein is a biochemical hallmark of mesenchymal transition [30]. Loss of E-cadherin in combination with the appearance of spindle cell morphology is associated with EMT in breast cancer cells. Expression level of E-cadherin is very low in MDA-MB-231 cells compared to the primary breast cancer model (MCF-7) [31]. Here, we investigated whether the quercetin-induced epithelial transition of MDA-MB-231 cells were associated with alteration of E-cadherin expression level. Our results showed that quercetin (50 μM) significantly increased the E-cadherin expression compared to vehicle treated cells, nine fold increase in mRNA expression (_P_ &lt; 0.001) and 10-fold higher protein expression was observed by qRT-PCR (Figure 3C) and Western blot analysis (Figure 3A), respectively. These results confirmed that quercetin has a significant impact on vimentin and E-cadherin levels.

#### Quercetin Treatment Inactivated β-Catenin

From the above data, it is clear that quercetin has significant effect in regulating the migratory ability of TNBC. It is essential to identify various signaling molecules that are regulated by quercetin and that contribute to the transition of the mesenchymal phenotype to the epithelial shape. It has been established that wnt/β-catenin pathway activation triggers EMT and leads to cancer cell invasion [6]. Of the many signaling molecules associated with the wnt/β-catenin pathway, β-catenin is the downstream transcriptional activator responsible for transmitting the cytoplasmic cellular signals into the nucleus, which leads to the activation of various target genes [32, 33]. Therefore we examined the expression and subcellular localization of β-catenin in quercetin treated MDA-MB-231 cells.

Our immunofluorescence analysis of MDA-MB-231 cells showed the nuclear localization of β-catenin in vehicle treated cells, whereas the major β-catenin localization was observed in the cytoplasm of quercetin treated cells (Figure 4A). Result observed with MDA-MB-231 was further confirmed by Western blot analysis using nuclear and cytoplasmic cellular fractions. Quercetin-treated MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited higher cytoplasmic β-catenin expression level, whereas the nuclear fraction of vehicle treated cells showed higher β-catenin expression level (Figure 4B). These results indicated that the quercetin degraded the nuclear β-catenin and led to the inactivation of β-catenin downstream signaling.

Figure 4\. Cellular localization of β-catenin is altered by quercetin treatment. (A) MDA-MB-231 cells treated with quercetin (50 μM) for 24 h and stained the cells with β-catenin (green), DAPI (blue) and wheat germ agglutinin [WGA] (red), and (B) Western blot analysis of cytosolic and nuclear fraction of 24 h quercetin treated (50 μM) was carried out using β-catenin antibody. Histogram shows the densitometric analysis of relative expression levels of cytosolic and nuclear β-catenin to β-actin. Error bars represent standard deviation of three independent experiments and _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


#### Alteration of β-Catenin Target Genes

The above data suggested that quercetin diminishes the activity of β-catenin in MDA-MB-231 cells. β-catenin is involved in the transcriptional activation of different target genes such as cyclin D1, c-Myc, and metalloproteinase-2 by releasing the inhibition of TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor [34, 35]. We determined the effect of quercetin treatment on expression levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc in MDA-MB-231 cells. Results showed that 24 h treatment of quercetin significantly decreased the mRNA and protein expression level of cyclin D1 (_P _&lt; 0.05) and c-Myc (_P _&lt; 0.01) by qRT-PCR analysis (Figure 5A). It has been reported that cyclin D1 is localized predominantly in the nucleus of growing cells [36, 37] and is associated with chemotherapy resistance and cancer cell migration in various cancers including ovarian cancer [38-40]. Studies suggested that GSK3-β plays a significant role in the degradation rate of cyclin D1 [41].

Figure 5\. Quercetin enhances cyclin D1 and c-Myc and decreases Akt phosphorylation of TNBC. Real time PCR analysis of cyclin D1 (A) and c-Myc (B) in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with 10 or 50 μM of quercetin for 24 h. mRNA expression levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with 10 or 50 μM quercetin for 24 h was determined by qRT-PCR using Taqman gene expression assay system. Histograms represent the relative mRNA expression level of cyclin D1 and c-Myc normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels, and (C) Western blot analysis of Akt phosphorylation in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with 10 or 50 μM concentration of quercetin for 6 h. Histogram shows the densitometric analysis of relative expression levels of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated Akt. Error bars represent standard deviation of three independent experiments and _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


Studies have established that Akt is the major signaling molecule regulating the activity of GSK3-β [42]. Therefore, we carried out experiments to study the effect of quercetin on Akt phosphorylation of MDA-MB-231 cells. Western blot analysis showed that quercetin (10 and 50 μM) significantly decreased the phosphorylation of Akt in the above-mentioned TNBC cells. MDA-MB-231 cells exhibit approximately threefold reduction in Akt phosphorylation (Ser473) followed by 6 h of quercetin (50 μM) treatment (Figure 5B).

Recent reports have suggested that PI3K/Akt mediated cell motility enhances the progression of cancer metastasis, also the cross talk between PI3K/Akt and TGF-β/Smad pathway stimulate cell migration [43] and enhance cancer cell metastasis [44]. Our studies revealed that quercetin regulated the Akt signaling in TNBC cells and led to the regulation of different downstream signaling pathway such as cyclin D1 and β-catenin.

#### Quercetin Decreased the Motility Induced by Doxorubicin in TNBC Cells

Previous studies suggested that in other cancer cells, quercetin potentiates doxorubicin mediated anti-tumor effects [16]. To test whether quercetin enhances the anti-carcinogenic effect of doxorubicin, we carried out a Boyden chamber migration assay in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells treated with different concentrations (0.1 or 0.5 μM) of doxorubicin. Our studies revealed that 0.1 μM doxorubicin significantly (_P _&lt; 0.01) decreased the migration of both TNBC cell lines; however the migratory ability was not decreased with 0.5 μM concentration (Figure 6A). A similar observation was also reported by other investigators regarding doxorubicin and other chemotherapy drugs [45]. Further, migration studies were assessed to analyze the ability of quercetin to decrease the invasion in cells treated with doxorubicin. Quercetin significantly decreased the migration in cells treated with both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 (Figure 6A).

Figure 6\. Doxorubicin is not effective to inhibit the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. (A) Migration assay was carried out in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells treated with different concentrations of doxorubicin and quercetin (50 μM) for 24 h. Histogram represent the number of cells migrated through the porous membrane in vehicle treated and different treatment conditions, (B) qRT-PCR analysis of TGF-β1 in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with different concentrations of doxorubicin, and (C) mRNA expression levels of TGF-β1 in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with doxorubicin (0.5 μM) and quercetin (50 μM) for 24 h was determined by qRT-PCR using Taqman gene expression assay system. Histograms represent the relative mRNA expression level of TGF-β1 normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels. Error bars represent standard deviation of three independent experiments and _P_ &lt; 0.05, _P_ &lt; 0.01, _P_ &lt; 0.001.


Available reports have suggested that alteration of TGF-β signaling is one of the major causative factors that block the effect of chemotherapy on breast cancer migration [45, 46]. To test whether doxorubicin altered TGF-β signaling, we treated MDA-MB-231 cells with different concentrations of doxorubicin and analyzed the expression level of TGF-β1 by qRT-PCR analysis. Studies revealed that lower concentration of doxorubicin (10 nM) significantly (_P _&lt; 0.01) reduced TGF-β1 level, whereas 0.5 μM concentration of doxorubicin significantly enhanced the TGF-β1 mRNA expression (Figure 6B).

Further, we carried out combination treatment of doxorubicin and quercetin in MDA-MB-231 in order to analyze the effect of quercetin to inhibit this TGF-β1 signaling as well as the migratory potential of doxorubicin. Quercetin decreased the TGF-β1 signaling (Figure 6C) and also enhanced the ability of doxorubicin to decrease the migratory potential of TNBC. These results suggested that quercetin is able to decrease the TGF-β1 signaling in doxorubicin-treated TNBC and may contribute to decreased cell migration.

#### Oncoprint Analysis of Genes Altered in Breast Cancer Basal-Like and Claudin-Low Sub Types

TNBC has most of the characteristics of basal-like and claudin-low sub types (1-5), therefore genomic alterations in basal-like and claudin-low subtypes of breast cancer were analyzed using cBioportal of cancer genomics [47, 48]. Analysis was focused on E-cadherin, cyclin D1, c-Myc, β-catenin and vimentin, which are significantly regulated in our experiments by quercetin treatment (Figure 7A and B). E-cadherin, an EMT marker is down regulated (25%) in claudin-low subtypes while 5% alteration in basal-like subtypes. Another EMT marker vimentin is upregulated in both basal-like and claudin-low patient samples. Upregulation of β-catenin mRNA was observed in basal-like subtype. Notably, 35% alteration including gene amplification and mRNA upregulation was observed for c-Myc in basal-like subtypes while there was no alteration in claudin-low subtypes. These observations indicate that the quercetin altered genes such as E-cadherin, cyclin D1, c-Myc, β-catenin and vimentin have significant implication in basal-like and claudin-low patients and modification of these genes may have beneficial effect to diminish TNBC metastasis.

Figure 7\. Oncoprint analysis of E-cadherin (CDH1), cyclin D1 (CCND1), c-Myc (MYC), β-catenin (CTNNB1), and vimentin (VIM) in breast cancer patient sample (basal-like and claudin-low subtypes). Data from the TCGA dataset containing molecular subtyping data of 81 breast cancer basal-like subtype (A) and 8 breast cancer claudin-low subtype (B) were extracted and used to generate an oncoprint plot using the cBio Cancer Genomics Portal [47, 48]. The results presented here are in whole or part based upon data generated by the TCGA Research Network (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/ and http://www.cbioportal.org). Each row represents a gene, and each column represents a tumor sample. Red bars indicate gene amplifications, blue bars are homozygous deletions, and green squares are nonsynonymous mutations.


### DISCUSSION

In the present study, we revealed the effect of a flavonoid on the migratory ability of TNBC cells. Previous studies suggested that quercetin, one of the major flavonoids present in fruits and vegetables, exerts its anti-tumor effect by decreasing the proliferative and migratory potential of TNBC cells. However, approximately 20% of TNBCs lack basal-like markers such as cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, CK 14, CK 17, and EGFR [1, 49]. Targeted therapy for metastatic breast cancer has been not sensitive to TNBC due to the lack of cell surface receptors. Further studies are warranted to identify new targets and new therapies that inhibit the metastatic ability of TNBC.

EMT happens in normal developmental and physiological processes, such as embryogenesis and wound healing respectively [50]. During this transformation, cobblestone-shaped epithelial cells change morphology and lose the ability of cell-cell attachment, resulting in the mesenchymal spindle-shaped cells [20]. Also, EMT allows the migration of cancer cells by unravelling the cancer cells from primary tumor site [51]. Different molecular signaling processes are associated with EMT transformation. Of these alterations, E-cadherin loss is one of the most significant characteristics of EMT in breast cancer metastasis. The oncoprint analysis also showed the down regulation of E-cadherin in some of the basal-like and claudin-low sub types. Western blot and qRT-PCR showed that quercetin significantly increased the E-cadherin expression in TNBC cells. In most of the metastatic cancer cells, E-cadherin loss is associated with higher expression of vimentin. Upregulation of vimentin was observed in oncoprint analysis of patient samples and also in MDA-MB-231 cells. Our studies suggested that the vimentin level is markedly decreased by quercetin treatment. Immunofluorescence analysis of vimentin further confirms the ability of quercetin to induce the epithelial transition of TNBC cells. In agreement with these results, a recent report suggested that flavonoids inhibit invadopodia formation in A431-III cells [19].

Various studies have demonstrated that the alteration in β-catenin pathway influences the migration of breast cancer [32, 33]. Breast cancer sample oncoprint analysis also indicates higher β-catenin expression level in basal-like cancer subtypes. The abnormal accumulation and nuclear translocation of β-catenin is associated with oncogenic activation [32]. The active form of β-catenin can bind to TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) and enhances the target genes such as c-Myc, MMP-2, and cyclin D1 [34]. Also, oncoprint of breast cancer patient samples revealed higher expression of c-Myc in basal-like breast cancer subtypes, this subtype is most closely related to TNBC. Immunohistochemical analysis of patient material suggested higher nuclear expression levels of β-catenin in TNBC samples [52].

Also, the increased nuclear β-catenin level was associated with poor clinical outcome of TNBC. In agreement with these reports, our immunofluorescence analysis showed nuclear localization of β-catenin in MDA-MDB-231cells (Figure 4A and B). Quercetin treatment decreased the nuclear localization of β-catenin and that resulted into the cytosolic localization of β-catenin. E-cadherin is one of the molecules that play a critical role in stabilizing β-catenin, by E-cadherin/β-catenin complex formation. This complex formation is essential for cell-cell adhesion and for maintenance of the epithelial phenotype [22]. Loss of E-cadherin may be one of the reasons for the nuclear localization of β-catenin in TNBC. Quercetin is able to modulate the expression level of E-cadherin and this contributes to the decreased level of nuclear localization of β-catenin. This alteration by quercetin may have resulted in decreased activation of LEF/TCF transcription factors, leading to decreased activation of genes such as cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Decreased expression of levels these genes were confirmed in quercetin-treated TNBC cells. Furthermore, c-Myc was found to be elevated in patient oncoprint analysis. Nuclear localized cyclin D1 has been shown to enhance tumor formation [36]. Our results suggested that regulating β-catenin pathway by quercetin inhibits the downstream oncogenic signaling cascades in TNBC.

The nuclear translocation of cyclin D1 is due to the phosphorylation at Thr286 by GSK-3β, the cytosolic fraction of cyclin D1 that undergoes proteosomal degradation by the ubiquitination pathway [53]. Cyclin D1 is regulated by nuclear accumulation and stabilization through Akt phosphorylation-induced inhibition of GSK-3β [41, 42]. Therefore, Akt plays a significant role in cyclin D1 cellular localization status in TNBC. Our study revealed that treatment of quercetin inhibited the phosphorylation status of Akt in MDA-MB- 231 cells. This result defines the variation in cellular localization of cyclin D1 in quercetin-treated cells. Reduced cyclin D1 nuclear localization may regulate EMT, because cyclin D1 is able to reduce cell attachment and induce breast cancer cell migration [54]. Studies have also suggested that cyclin D1 activity is essential for the self-renewal of mammary stem and progenitor cells [55].

Various available reports are supportive regarding the role of c-Myc in the regulation of metastatic phenotype. It is established that Myc is highly expressed in basal-like tumors compared to luminal and Her2 overexpressing tumors [56]. Myc regulates the invasion and migration of cells by collaborating with other oncogenic pathways [25]. This study suggested that Myc and cyclin D1, the two β-catenin target genes, are downregulated by quercetin in TNBC. This downregulation may be one of the reasons for the inhibition of cell migration.

Our findings indicated that quercetin inhibits EMT by regulating different signaling molecules that are involved in the formation of mesenchymal phenotype. Furthermore, to confirm quercetin-mediated inhibition of TNBC motility, doxorubicin-treated cells are used as experimental model. Doxorubicin is an anthracycline drug and is one of the major drugs used as a chemotherapy drug to treat TNBC. However, some studies have suggested that treatment with doxorubicin induces migration and invasion of breast cancer [46]. We identified that lower concentrations of doxorubicin (0.1 μM) inhibit the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas higher concentrations is not able to inhibit migratory ability of TNBC cells.

Previous studies indicated that activation of TGF-β signaling is one of the mechanisms behind the enhancement of migration by doxorubicin [46]. We confirmed this finding and observed that cells treated with 0.5 μM doxorubicin significantly enhanced the expression level of TGF-β1 levels. The co-treatment with doxorubicin and quercetin decreased TGF-β1 activation and prevented the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. Studies also suggested that quercetin potentiates the effect of doxorubicin in drug resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cell line [57], liver cancer cells [58]. Recurrence of cancer after chemotherapy or radiotherapy is very common in TNBC patients. In this context, further studies are needed to confirm that the recurrence of TNBC after chemotherapy could be avoided by combination treatment of doxorubicin and quercetin in order to enhance the doxorubicin effect in TNBC. In conclusion our studies suggest that the quercetin inhibits the increased migration ability of TNBC. Quercetin is able to regulate EMT markers such as E-cadherin and vimentin in aggressive TNBC cells. Furthermore, quercetin is effective in regulating active β-catenin signaling. Also, the quercetin is capable of inhibiting TGF-β1 induced by higher concentration of doxorubicin. Further studies will be needed to learn more about whether the combination treatment of quercetin and doxorubicin would be a beneficial treatment for TNBC. Studies will also be planned to develop different quercetin analogues to enhance its bioavailability and the biological activity of these derivatives will be compared with parent molecule.

Anti-tumor activity of quercetin was recorded in various pre-clinical and clinical trials. Studies identified that dietary supplementation of quercetin decreased the growth of orthotopic pancreatic tumors in a nude mouse model [59]. A quercetin analogue 3′,4′,5′-trimethoxyflavonol inhibited tumor development in _ApcMin_ mice and human-derived HCT116 adenocarcinoma-bearing nude mice [60]. A recent study on dose-dependent effects of quercetin on tumorigenesis in a C3(1)/SV40 Tag transgenic breast cancer model reported reduced tumor volume in moderate dose (0.2% diet) administered group compared to high (2%) and low dose (0.02%) [61]. Few studies on quercetin were prolonged up to human clinical trial level. A phase 1 clinical trial studied the anti-proliferative and pharmacokinetics effects of quercetin in cancer patients and observed the tyrosine kinase inhibition and anti-tumor activity [62]. The toxicity studies from this trial also revealed that the higher dose of quercetin induced nephrotoxicity [62]. Recent studies have identified that quercetin increases the bioavailability and chemo preventive action of green tea in prostate cancer pre-clinical models [63, 64]. Further, these studies are extended to confirm quercetin's ability to enhance the uptake of green tea in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. Another clinical trial is currently evaluating the efficacy of genistein and quercetin in comparison with a placebo on the rate of increase in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (NCT01538316). Early observations from this study showed an inverse relationship between genistein intake and PSA levels in patients with higher PSA levels [65]. The available pre-clinical and clinical data suggest that the moderate dose of quercetin is less toxic and effective as an anti-tumor agent. Additionally, quercetin showed significant influence in inducing the bioavailability of other dietary constituents in preclinical and clinical studies. The future studies will be focused on anti-tumor activity of quercetin with existing chemotherapeutic drugs in inhibiting the migratory ability of TNBC in animal model.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by the Dean's Research Fund, Jefferson School of Pharmacy, Thomas Jefferson University.
