# 6-Shogaol, a Major Compound in Ginger, Induces Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Transcriptional Activity and Gene Expression

## Abstract

Xenobiotics are usually detoxified by drug-metabolizing enzymes and excreted from the body. The expression of many of drug-metabolizing enzymes is regulated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Some substances in vegetables have the potential to be AHR ligands. To search for vegetable components that exhibit AHR-mediated transcriptional activity, we assessed the activity of vegetable extracts and identified the active compounds using the previously established stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cell line. Among the hot water extracts of vegetables, the highest activity was found in ginger. The ethyl acetate fraction of the ginger hot water extract remarkably induced AHR-mediated transcriptional activity, and the major active compound was found to be 6-shogaol. Subsequently, the mRNA levels of AHR-targeting drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP1A1, UGT1A1, and ABCG 2) and the protein level of CYP1A1 in HepG2 cells were shown to be increased by 6-shogaol. This is the first report that 6-shogaol can regulate the expression of detoxification enzymes by AHR activation.

#### Keywords: 


## Introduction

The human body is exposed to a wide variety of xenobiotics in one’s lifetime, from food components to environmental toxins to pharmaceuticals; it has developed complex enzymatic mechanisms to detoxify these substances. Lipophilic xenobiotics are usually metabolized into more hydrophilic forms by drug-metabolizing enzymes, mainly in the liver, and excreted from the body. The metabolism of xenobiotics is commonly broken down into three systems: phase I, II, and III systems.(1, 2) The phase I system is an oxidative process and is mainly mediated by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) supergene family. As a consequence of this step in the detoxification, reactive molecules, which may be more toxic than the parent molecule, are produced. In the phase II system, activated hydrophobic xenobiotics are converted into hydrophilic forms via conjugation reactions with glucuronide, sulfate, or glutathione. The phase II system is composed of conjugation enzymes such as glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs), sulfotransferases (SULTs), and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs). The phase III system is composed of more than 40 different human ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter families and is involved in the exclusion of xenobiotics and their metabolites.

It has been shown that the gene expression of many of these drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters is regulated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which is a ligand-dependent transcription factor present in most cell and tissue types in the body.(3) AHR translocates into the nucleus and heterodimerizes with a protein known as the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT).(4) This AHR/ARNT complex binds to specific enhancer sequences adjacent to target promoters termed the xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE), which enhances the transcription of target genes encoding phase I metabolic enzymes such as CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, phase II metabolic enzymes such as UGT1A1 and UGT1A6, and phase III metabolic enzymes such as the ABC transporter subfamily G, member 2 (ABCG 2).(2, 5-9) Therefore, AHR is regarded as a key regulator of xenobiotic metabolism.

The regulation of AHR by dietary factors is of considerable importance and interest because AHR regulates drug-metabolizing enzymes as described above, and so it is likely that metabolism of xenobiotics could be modulated by dietary factors via AHR. In previous studies, some substances contained in vegetables, such as flavonoids,(10-12) indole compounds,(13, 14) and curcumin,(15) were shown to act as natural AHR ligands. However, it is possible that vegetables contain other AHR-activating compounds because there are so many plant-derived compounds in vegetables.

The aim of this study was to search for vegetable components that exhibited AHR-mediated transcriptional activity and modulation of xenobiotic metabolism. Previously, we established the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cell line by cotransfection of an AHR expression vector (pcDNA-hAHR) and an AHR-responsive vector (pGL3-XRE) containing a luciferase gene and three tandemly arranged XRE elements into the human hepatoma cell line, HepG2.(16) Using this cell line, we assessed the AHR-mediated transcriptional activity of vegetable extracts and identified new active compounds in vegetables. We also examined the regulation of mRNA and protein expressions of AHR-target xenobiotic-metabolizing genes by these active compounds.

## Materials and Methods


The stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells and HepG2/mock cells (empty vectors were transfected) were grown and maintained at 37 °C in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) High Glucose with l-glutamine and phenol red (Wako Pure Chemical Industries 044-29765 Osaka, Japan), containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Asahi Technoglass, Chiba, Japan), 40 U/mL penicillin, 40 μg/mL streptomycin, and 500 μg/mL G418 (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) in a 100% humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. For culturing of HepG2 cells, G418 was removed from the same medium as that used for culturing the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells.


Fresh vegetables were purchased from local markets in Nasushiobara, Japan (Table 1). Preparation of vegetable extracts was conducted as described in Figure 1. Each vegetable was chopped and boiled in four-times its weight of hot water for 1 h. The extraction liquid was then recovered and centrifuged at 8000_g_ for 10 min at room temperature. A portion of the obtained supernatant (40 mL) was lyophilized, and the resultant powder was used as the “hot water extract (HWE)” sample. A portion of the supernatant (100 mL) was adjusted to pH 3.0 by adding 2 M hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of 200 mL of ethyl acetate. The mixture was then vigorously shaken in a separating funnel to separate it into the ethyl acetate layer and aqueous layer. This extraction was repeated four times. All the ethyl acetate layers were collected, and the ethyl acetate was evaporated. The obtained residue was used as the “ethyl acetate fraction (EAF)” sample. The aqueous layer was adjusted to pH 5.5 by adding 2 M sodium hydroxide and lyophilized. The obtained lyophilized powder was used as the “water fraction (WF)” sample.





3-Methylcholanthlene (3MC), 6-shogaol, 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, and 10-gingerol were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries. 8-Shogaol and 10-shogaol were obtained from ChromaDex (Irvine, CA, USA). Each phytochemical was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at a concentration of 50 mM.


The luciferase assay was carried out to assess AHR-mediated transcriptional activity as previously described.(17) The stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells or HepG2/mock cells were seeded onto a 24-well plate (Corning-Coster Japan Product #3526, Tokyo, Japan) at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well. The 24-well plate was precoated with Type I-C collagen (Nitta Geratin, Osaka, Japan) for 30 min before the cells were seeded. After incubating overnight, the medium was replaced with a medium containing each test sample or 3MC (positive control). Each sample was diluted in the cell culture medium at the test concentration; the final concentration of DMSO was ≤0.1% (v/v) in the cell culture medium. After 24 h of culture, the cells were washed twice with 500 μL of PBS and then lysed with 100 μL of 1× passive lysis buffer (Promega). The lysate was centrifuged at 15000_g_ for 5 min, and the supernatant was used for the luciferase assay. Luciferase activity was determined by a dual-luciferase reporter assay (Promega) with an LB9507 Lumet luminometer (Berthold Technologies, Bad Wildbad, Germany).


The EAF from ginger and the standard phytochemicals were dissolved in methanol at concentrations of 10 mg/mL and 5 mM, respectively. HPLC analysis was performed using a photodiode array detector (L-2455, HITACH, Tokyo, Japan) and a PEGASIL-B ODS C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 4.6 μm; Senshu Scientific, Tokyo, Japan). The mobile phases were as follows: (a) acidified methanol (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) and (b) acidified Milli-Q water (0.1% TFA). Pumps were programmed to perform the following gradient at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min: from 20% solvent A to 80% solvent A over 50 min, to 100% solvent A at 55 min, and then to 0% solvent A at 60 min, with a column temperature of 35 °C. The separated compounds in the EAF were identified by comparison of the retention time and UV spectra to 6-shogaol or 6-gingerol standards.


The mRNA expression level of CYP1A1, UGT1A1, and ABCG 2, the target genes of AHR, was evaluated by real-time PCR. HepG2 cells were seeded onto a 24-well plate precoated with Type I-C collagen at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well. After overnight incubation, the medium was replaced with a medium containing 6-shogaol. After 24 h of culture, total RNA was extracted from the cells using Isogen. cDNA was prepared from 1 μg of the total RNA. Real-time PCR was performed with SYBR Premix Ex _Taq_II (TAKARA BIO INC., Otsu, Japan) and the 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Tokyo, Japan). After denaturing at 95 °C for 30 s, PCR was performed for 40 cycles of denaturing at 95 °C for 5 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and dissociation at 95 °C for 15 s, followed by 60 °C for 60 s and 95 °C for 15 s. The PCR primers used for CYP1A1 and UGT1A1 were synthesized at Invitrogen; the primers used for β-actin and ABCG 2 were synthesized at TAKARA BIO INC. The sequence of each primer is shown in Table 2.




HepG2 cells were seeded onto a 6-well plate precoated with Type I-C collagen at a density of 1 × 106 cells/well. After overnight incubation, the medium was replaced with a medium containing 6-shogaol. After 24 h of culture, cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were scraped off and then suspended in 1 mL of PBS. The precipitate obtained by centrifugation at 1000_g_ for 5 min at 4 °C was homogenized with 0.1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) with 0.1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and left on ice for 20 min. The homogenate was centrifuged at 18000_g_ for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was dissolved in electrophoresis sample buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 100 °C for 5 min.

Samples containing 30 μg of protein were loaded onto 12.5% polyacrylamide gel. Electrophoresis was conducted in an electrode buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 0.1% (w/v) SDS) with a fixed current (20 mA). An Immobilon polyvinylidene difloride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA) was treated with methanol and then blotting buffer (100 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 20% methanol). The BioRad tank type of blotting apparatus was used for electrophoretic transfer of the gel to the PVDF membrane at 200 mM over 120 min.

After blotting, this PVDF membrane was blocked overnight at 4 °C by 0.1% Tween-20 and 5% skimmed milk dissolved in PBS. It was then incubated for 2 h with mouse monoclonal CYP1A1 antibody (1:100 dilution; sc-25304 Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or incubated for 1 h with mouse monoclonal β-Actin antibody (1:200 dilution; sc-47778 Santa Cruz Biotechnology) dissolved in a Can Get Signal immunoreaction enhancer solution (Toyobo, Japan). After the PVDF membrane had been washed three times with 0.1% Tween-20 dissolved in PBS for 5 min each, it was incubated for 1 h with antimouse immunoglobulin G-horseradish peroxidase (IgG-HRP; 1:2000 dilution; NA931, GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, U.K.) Proteins were detected by an ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare), followed by analysis with an LAS-1000 mini image analyzer and Multi Gauge Ver2.0 (Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).


The data from the luciferase assay and real-time PCR were expressed as the mean ± SD. Statistical significance was analyzed using the Dunnett’s test, and a _p_ value of &lt;0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.

## Results


HWEs from 11 vegetables significantly increased the relative luciferase activity as shown in Figure 2A. Among the 11 HWEs, five HWEs, namely ginger (2.68-fold induction), molokhia (2.3-fold induction), parsley (2.34-fold induction), spinach (2.27-fold induction), and ashitaba (2.01-fold induction), substantially increased the relative luciferase activity, showing more than a 2-fold induction compared with control. To confirm the results shown in Figure 2A, we further evaluated nonspecific induction of luciferase activity by the five HWEs using HepG2/mock cells. The stable AHR-responsive cells and HepG2/mock cells were treated with each HWE, and luciferase activity in the stable AHR-responsive cells was divided by that in the HepG2/mock cells. These data indicated that all five HWEs significantly induced luciferase activity (Figure 2B).

Figure 2. (A) Effects of the HWEs on AHR-mediated transcriptional activity. Stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells were incubated with each HWE at 0.5 mg/mL for 24 h, and AHR-mediated transcriptional activity is shown as luciferase activity. Untreated cells were used as the control. (B) Effects of HWEs from ginger, molkhia, parsley, spinach, and ashitaba on AHR-mediated transcriptional activity corrected by AHR-nonspecific luciferase activity. Stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells and HepG2/mock cells were incubated with each HWE at 0.25 mg/mL for 24 h, and AHR-mediated transcriptional activity is shown as luciferase activity. Luciferase activity in the stable AHR-responsive cells was divided by that in the HepG2/mock cells, and relative values were calculated. Untreated cells were used as the control. (C) Effects of EAFs and WFs from ginger, molkhia, parsley, spinach, and ashitaba on AHR-mediated transcriptional activity. Stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells were incubated with each sample at 100 μg/mL for 24 h, and AHR-mediated transcriptional activity is shown as luciferase activity. The untreated and the 0.1% DMSO-treated cells were used as controls for WFs and EAFs, respectively. The relative luciferase activity measured for the control was taken as 1. 3MC was used as the positive control (5 μM). Each value is the mean ± SD (_n_ = 3). Statistically significant differences from the value of the control were analyzed by the Dunnett’s test; _p_ &lt; 0.05; _p_ &lt; 0.01.

Effect of the EAFs and WFs from Ginger, Molokhia, Parsley, Spinach, and Ashitaba on AHR-Mediated Transcriptional Activity

As shown in Figure 2C, the EAF from ginger remarkably increased AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (5.07-fold induction). The EAFs from ashitaba and molokhia also significantly increased AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (1.56- and 1.52-fold induction, respectively). Only the WF from ginger significantly increased AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (1.69-fold induction).


Since the EAF from ginger showed the highest AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (Figure 2C), it was further analyzed by HPLC. Two peaks (peak 1 and peak 2) appeared at retention times of 38 and 46 min (Figure 3A), which are the same retention times as those of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol, respectively (Figure 3B). Figure 3C shows that the UV spectra of peaks 1 and 2 correspond to those of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol (Figure 3D), respectively.

Figure 3. (A) HPLC profiles of the EAFs of ginger. (B) HPLC profiles and chemical structures of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol. (C) UV spectra of peak 1 (left) and peak 2 (right). (D) UV spectra of 6-gingerol (left) and 6-shogaol (right).

Effects of 6-Shogaol and 6-Gingerol on the Induction of AHR-Mediated Transcriptional Activity

Treatment of the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells with 6-shogaol for 24 h resulted in a significant increase in luciferase activity in a dose-dependent manner up to 50 μM (Figure 4A). On the other hand, treatment of the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells with 6-gingerol for 24 h had no effect on luciferase activity up to 50 μM (Figure 4B).

Figure 4. AHR-mediated transcriptional activity after treatment with various concentrations of 6-shogaol (A) and 6-gingerol (B). Stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells were treated with 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol at the indicated concentrations for 24 h, and AHR-mediated transcriptional activity is shown as luciferase activity. The 0.1% DMSO-treated cells were used as the control. (C) Effects of gingerols and shogaols on the induction of AHR-mediated transcriptional activity in the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells. The stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells were treated with each sample at 25 μM for 24 h, and AHR-mediated transcriptional activity is shown as luciferase activity. The 0.05% DMSO-treated cells were used as the control. The relative luciferase activity measured for the control was taken as 1. Each value is the mean ± SD (_n_ = 3). Statistically significant differences from the value of the control were analyzed by the Dunnett’s test; _p_ &lt; 0.05;  _p_ &lt; 0.01.

Effects of Gingerol and Shogaols on the Induction of AHR-Mediated Transcriptional Activity

Treatments of the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells with 6-, 8-, and 10-shogaol for 24 h resulted in significant increases of luciferase activity, and especially, 6- and 8-shogaol strongly increased luciferase activity (Figure 4C). On the other hand, treatments of the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells with 6-, 8-, and 10-gengerol for 24 h had no effects on luciferase activity.

mRNA Levels of AHR-Target Genes in HepG2 Cells after Treatment with Various Concentrations of 6-Shogaol

The expression levels of the AHR-target genes CYP1A1, UGT1A1, and ABCG 2 in HepG2 cells were measured by real-time PCR. Exposure of HepG2 cells to 6-shogaol significantly increased the expression level of CYP1A1 mRNA in a concentration-dependent manner up to 50 μM (Figure 5A). The expression levels of UGT1A1 and ABCG 2 indicated a significant increase after treatment of 6-shogaol only at 50 μM (Figure 5B, C).

Figure 5. mRNA and protein expression levels of AHR-target genes in HepG2 cells after treatment with various concentrations of 6-shogaol. HepG2 cells were treated with 6-shogaol at the indicated concentrations for 24 h. Total RNA from the cells were extracted, and mRNA expression levels of CYP1A1 (A), UGT1A1 (B), and ABCG 2 (C) were evaluated by real-time PCR. The 0.1% DMSO-treated cells were used as the control. The mRNA levels of AHR-target genes were normalized to those of β-actin mRNA, and the relative mRNA expression measured for the control was taken as 1. Each value is the mean ± SD (_n_ = 6). Statistically significant differences from the value of the control were analyzed by the Dunnett’s test; _p_ &lt; 0.01. (D) Protein level of CYP1A1 in HepG2 cells after treatment with various concentrations of 6-shogaol. HepG2 cells were treated with 6-shogaol at the indicated concentrations for 24 h, and the protein expression level of CYP1A1 was evaluated byWestern blotting. The 0.1% DMSO-treated cells were used as the control. The protein expression level of CYP1A1 was normalized to those of β-actin, and the relative protein expression measured for the control was taken as 1.

Protein Level of CYP1A1 in HepG2 Cells after Treatment with Various Concentrations of 6-Shogaol

The protein expression levels of CYP1A1 in HepG2 cells were measured by Western blotting. Exposure of HepG2 cells to 6-shogaol increased the protein expression level of CYP1A1 to more than 2-fold of control by treatment with 25 and 50 μM 6-shogaol (Figure 5D).

## Discussion

Previous studies have reported that crude extracts of green tea, black tea, and propolis functioned as natural antagonists toward AHR.(18-20) Moreover, it was reported that extracts of vegetables, such as molokhia, suppressed AHR transformation in cell-free systems.(21) However, these reports focused on the suppressive effect of food extracts on AHR activation. De Waard et al. suggested that extracts of citrus pulp and grapefruit juice contained natural AHR agonists,(22) but detailed studies on AHR activation by vegetable extracts have not yet been reported. We examined the effect of HWEs from various vegetables on AHR-mediated transcriptional activity by the luciferase assay using the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 and HepG2/mock cell lines. The results showed that the HWEs from ginger, molokhia, parsley, spinach, and ashitaba increased AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (Figure 2A, B). These five HWEs increased the luciferase activity in a dose-dependent manner at concentrations of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 mg/mL (data not shown). In this study, the HWE from molokhia induced AHR-mediated transcriptional activity, even though the molokhia extract has previously been suggested to be an AHR antagonist.(21) Molokhia contains quercetin in abundance,(23) which could function as an AHR antagonist(11) or an AHR agonist.(12, 24) Therefore, compounds in molokhia such as quercetin could cause contradictory results. The results presented in this study are the first to indicate that some vegetable extracts can increase AHR-mediated transcriptional activity.

Our data indicated that the HWEs from five vegetables contained compounds that may activate AHR. We evaluated the AHR-mediated transcriptional activity of the WFs and EAFs of each vegetable to delineate the active compound in each HWE. Because HWEs were crude extracts, we used the HepG2/MOCK cell line to exclude nonspecific luciferase activity. Since nonspecific luciferase activity was not observed (Figure 2B), we did not use the HepG2/MOCK cell line in subsequent experiments. The luciferase assay using ethyl acetate and water fraction from all five vegetables showed that parsley and spinach had no activity in both fractions. In addition, the ethyl acetate fractions from molokhia and ashitaba had much less activity than that from ginger (Figure 2C), so we focused on the identification of active compounds in ginger. Therefore, to further identify the AHR-activating compounds, we analyzed this fraction by HPLC.

Shogaols and gingerols are the main compounds in ginger and ginger products, and 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol are the main components,(25-28) so we analyzed the EAF from ginger, 6-shogaol, and 6-gingerol. We showed that two major peaks appeared at retention times of 38 and 46 min (Figure 3A), and these peaks corresponded to the peaks of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol, respectively (Figure 3B, C, D). This data suggested that 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol were the main compounds in EAF from ginger. Shogaols are compounds formed by dehydrating gingerols, and they are not thought to be present in fresh rhizome.(25, 26) Gingerols are not stable during storage or thermal processing, and they generate shogaols.(25, 26) It was suggested that the 6-shogaol detected in the EAF from ginger in this study resulted from the conversion of 6-gingerol to 6-shogaol during the extraction in hot water.

Treatment of the stable AHR-responsive HepG2 cells with 6-shogaol for 24 h resulted in significant increases in luciferase activity in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 4A). These data are the first to verify induction of AHR-mediated transcriptional activity by 6-shogaol. More interestingly, 6-gingerol had no effect on AHR-mediated transcriptional activity (Figure 4B). 6-Shogaol has been reported to have a much stronger inhibitory effect on the growth of various cancer cell lines than 6-gingerol.(29-31) Koliopanos et al. and Peng et al. reported that AHR agonists inhibited the growth of cancer cells.(32, 33) Our finding that 6-shogaol, but not 6-gingerol, is a strong AHR activator may explain why 6-shogaol has a stronger inhibitory effect on the growth of cancer cells.

We think that only evaluation of the activities of the two most abundant components in ginger was insufficient to identify the active compounds in ginger. Therefore, 8-shogaol, 10-shogaol, 8-gingerol, and 10-gingerol, the major compounds in ginger other than 6-shogaol and 6-gingerol, were used for the luciferase assay. Figure 4C shows that 8-shogaol had the same activity as 6-shogaol, but 8-shogaol was not detected in the HPLC chromatogram of EAF from ginger shown in Figure 3A. These results show that 6-shogaol is the most major activator of AHR among shogaols and gingerols. Moreover, the concentration of 6-shogaol in the solution of EAF from ginger (100 μg/mL) was calculated to be about 27 μM by HPLC analysis (data not shown). In this study, the AHR-mediated transcriptional activity was 4–5 fold induction when 100 μg/mL of the EAF from ginger was used, whereas the transcriptional activity was about 2-fold induction when 25 μM of 6-shogaol was used. Based on these data, the activity of 6-shogaol accounted for about 50% of activity, so 6-shogaol is thought to be the most major activator of AHR in ginger.

6-Shogaol induced mRNA expression of the following AHR-target genes: phase I metabolic enzyme CYP1A1, phase II metabolic enzyme UGT1A1, and phase III metabolic enzyme ABCG 2 (Figure 5A, B, C) and protein expression of CYP1A1 (Figure 5D). These are the first data indicating that 6-shogaol induced expression of detoxification enzymes. Liska reported that a multifunctional inducer in detoxification systems was important.(1) Indeed, we have demonstrated the usefulness of 6-shogaol as a multifunctional inducer in this report.

The AHR has been found to favor hydrophobic molecular with a quasi-planar structure and to accommodate a ligand-binding pocket of approximately 14 × 12 × 5 Å.(34, 35) Some flavonoids that induce AHR activity have molecular sizes and planar structures that could bind to a ligand-binding pocket of AHR.(10) Although there is no report about the detailed structure analysis of 6-shogaol, based on its structure, we guess that the molecular size of 6-shogaol is smaller than that of flavonoids and that 6-shogaol may bind to a ligand-binding pocket of AHR. Moreover, shogaols, but not gingerols, induced AHR activity in this study. Unlike gingerols, shogaols have the α,β-unsaturated ketone group. Compounds having this structure are good substrates for Michael addition reactions and are rendered electrophilic by conjugation with electron-withdrawing groups.(36) This difference of electrophilic nature based on the structures of shogaols and gingerols may cause the difference of AHR activities. Another possible mechanism of AHR activation by 6-shogaol is the effect of its metabolites. We evaluated the AHR-mediated transcriptional activity and mRNA expression of AHR-target genes by treatment of cells with 6-shogaol for 24 h. Most 6-shogaol has been shown to be metabolized to other reduced forms within 24 h in various cancer cell lines, and these metabolites retain their bioactivity.(37-39) Recently, the cysteine-conjugated metabolite of 6-shogaol, 5-cysteinyl-6-shogaol, exerts its bioactivity by acting as a carrier of 6-shogaol in cancer cells and showed strong growth inhibitory effects toward cancer cells.(39) These bioactive metabolites of 6-shogaol may contribute to induction of AHR activity. Further experiments are necessary to reveal whether or not the bioactive metabolites of 6-shogaol also exhibit induction of AHR-mediated transcriptional activity and mRNA expression of AHR-target genes.

We revealed for the first time that ginger more strongly induced AHR-mediated transcription compared to other vegetables such as molokhia, parsley, spinach, and ashitaba. We also found that 6-shogaol was the major active compound in ginger. The mRNA expression levels of AHR-targeting drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP1A1, UGT1A1, ABCG 2) and the protein level of CYP1A1 in HepG2 cells were induced by 6-shogaol. These results are the first verification of AHR-mediated regulation of detoxification systems by 6-shogaol. This study suggests that AHR-mediated modulation of detoxification systems can be expected in the presence of 6-shogaol, although in vivo studies are needed to clarify whether AHR will be activated by the intake of 6-shogaol.

