# Green tea (Camellia sinensis) extract inhibits both the metastasis and osteolytic components of mammary cancer 4T1 lesions in mice

## Abstract

Green tea (_Camellia sinensis_, _CS_), a kind of Chinese tea commonly consumed as a healthy beverage, has been demonstrated to have various biological activities, including antioxidation, antiobesity and anticancer. Our study aims to investigate the antitumor, antimetastasis and antiosteolytic effects of _CS_ aqueous extract both _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ using metastasis-specific mouse mammary carcinoma 4T1 cells. Our results showed that treatment of 4T1 cells with _CS_ aqueous extract resulted in significant inhibition of 4T1 cell proliferation. _CS_ extract induced 4T1 apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner as assessed by annexin-V and propidium iodide staining and caspase-3 activity. Western blot analysis showed that _CS_ increased the expression of Bax-to-Bcl-2 ratio and activated caspase-8 and caspase-3 to induce apoptosis. _CS_ also inhibited 4T1 cell migration and invasion at 0.06-0.125 mg/ml. In addition, _CS_ extract (0.6 g/kg, orally fed daily for 4 weeks) was effective in decreasing the tumor weight by 34.8% in female BALB/c mice against water treatment control (100%). Apart from the antitumor effect, _CS_ extract significantly decreased lung and liver metastasis in BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 tumors by 54.5% and 72.6%, respectively. Furthermore, micro-computed tomography and _in vitro_ osteoclast staining analysis suggested that _CS_ extract was effective in bone protection against breast cancer-induced bone destruction. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that the _CS_ aqueous extract, which closely mimics green tea beverage, has potent antitumor and antimetastasis effects in breast cancer and could protect the bone from breast cancer-induced bone destruction.