# Polyphenol Compounds in Artichoke Plant Tissues and Varieties

### Abstract

Abstract:  Polyphenol compounds, particularly caffeoylquinic acids and flavonoids, were measured in different tissues and developmental stages of  6 artichoke varietal types diffused in the Mediterranean region. Flower heads were subdivided into external, intermediate, internal bracts, and receptacle, while leaves were collected at the vegetative and productive stages. The main polyphenols detected were chlorogenic acid, cynarin, luteolin 7-O-rutinoside, and luteolin 7-O-glucoside. "Violet de Provence" artichoke proved to retain the highest content of total phenols. Single polyphenols accumulated preferentially in specific parts of capitula. In leaves, most polyphenols were detected in the productive stage of the plant. Altogether, results provide useful indications for the promotion of artichoke as nutraceutical food and for the extraction of health-promoting substances in particular tissues/stages of the artichoke plant.

Practical Application:  We describe the content of phenolic compounds in various artichoke tissues, developmental stages, and varieties. Results indicate that artichoke leaves represent an important source of these health-promoting compounds, also useful for phytopharmaceutical applications. A wider utilization of specific artichoke types should be strongly encouraged not only as a food for the fresh market, as they are now used, but also for the pharmaceutical industry, since the content of phenolic compounds is abundant both in the heads and in the leaves.



### Introduction

Globe artichoke is a crop belonging to the Asteraceae family, originating from the Mediterranean region where it is traditionally cultivated and commonly consumed as a vegetable (Foury 1989; Sonnante and others 2007). It is known since ancient times as a food and a remedy in medicine (Marzi and others 1975).

As a vegetable, globe artichoke plays an important role in human nutrition, especially nowadays that the Mediterranean diet has been recognized as the intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (UNESCO 2010). This crop contributes significantly to the agricultural economy of the Mediterranean area, with an annual production of about 770000 tonnes (t; &gt;60% of total global production) from over 80 kha of cultivated land. Italy is the leading world producer (about 474000 t), followed by Spain and France. Artichoke is also cultivated in the Near East (Turkey and Iran), North Africa (Egypt, Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia), South America (Argentina, Chile, and Peru), and the United States (mainly in California), and its cultivation is spreading in China (Bianco 2005; FAO Statistical Database 2009).

Artichoke flower heads (or "capitula") are immature composite inflorescences, including the edible part of the plant used worldwide as a fresh, frozen, or canned foodstuff. Leaf extracts have been widely used in herbal medicine as hepatoprotectors and choleretics, and also possess anticarcinogenic, anti-HIV, antioxidative, diuretic, as well as antifungal and antibacterial properties (Gebhart 2001; Coon and Ernst 2003; Lattanzio and others 2009). The beneficial effects of artichoke plant on human health are mainly due to flavonoids and phenolic acids, particularly caffeic acid and its derivatives mono and dicaffeoylquinic acids. These compounds have been demonstrated to be bioavailable to humans in their diet (Azzini and others 2007).

Moreover, artichoke industrial by-products (stems, outer bracts, leaves) represent about 80% of the biomass and may be used as raw material for the extraction of food additives and antioxidants, while the lignocellulose biomass may provide green forage for livestock and may serve as an energy crop (Ceccarelli and others 2010).

Many studies have focused on artichoke antioxidant properties but few of these are related to the abundance of the polyphenolic fractions in head parts or in various developmental stages of the plant (for example, Schutz and others 2004; Fratianni and others 2007; Lombardo and others 2010).

Italy possesses the richest globe artichoke primary cultivated "gene pool" and harbors many distinct landraces, best adapted to different local environments and, from an agronomical point of view, each region preserves its peculiar local varieties which may differ in morphological traits and chemical composition and, therefore, may exhibit different bioactive properties (Hammouda and others 1993; Sonnante and others 2003).

Despite the variation present in the cultivated Italian germplasm, the number of varietal types with market value is limited to just a few. In addition, the recent introduction of non-autochthonous and seed-propagated varieties is leading to a progressive erosion of local ecotypes; a similar issue can also be referred to local accessions of other European nations.

This article deals with the chemical characterization of 6 traditionally cultivated varietal types of artichoke. The phenolic composition was analyzed in various plant parts: leaves collected in different developmental stages and the edible head subdivided in external (ExB), intermediate (ImB), internal bracts (InB), and receptacle (Rec). The aim was to acquire information on the accumulation on polyphenol fractions in artichoke plant tissues, to help identify strategies for promoting the use of autochthonous globe artichoke genetic resources rich in health-promoting compounds.

### Materials and Methods

#### Plant material and management practices

Six globe artichoke varietal types were selected. Four of them, namely "Mola,""Tondo di Paestum,""Sant'Erasmo," and "Bianco di Ostuni" are Italian traditional local varieties, well adapted to the environment of cultivation areas, and particularly "Tondo di Paestum" was appointed the protected geographic indication (PGI) European mark. "Blanca de Tudela" is widely cultivated in Spain, and "Violet de Provence" is largely diffused in southern France and Italy. This material was also selected on the basis of flowering time and flower head color. "Mola,""Blanca de Tudela," and "Violet de Provence" are early, while the others are late varieties; "Bianco di Ostuni" and "Blanca de Tudela" possess green capitula, "Mola" and "Violet de Provence" have flower heads colored in green with purple veins, whereas "Sant'Erasmo" and "Tondo di Paestum" are purple varieties.

The plant material was arranged adopting a planting density of 1.3 plant m2 (plant spaced 1 m apart, in rows separated apart by 1.3 m). The collection was grown at the experimental field of the Inst. of Plant Genetics at Policoro, Italy. The field is situated around 15 m above sea level (a.s.l.) and is characterized by a subdamp climate, according to the De Martonne classification. The principal chemical-physics characteristics of the soil are: sand 40%, slime 37.1%, clay 22.9%, pH 7.7, total N (method Kjeldal) 1.67%, available P2O5 (method Olsen) 26.7 ppm, K2O of exchange (the ammonium's method acetate) 227 ppm, organic substance (method Walkley-Black) 3.64%, total limestone 1.5%, active limestone 0.5%; ECe 0.95 dS m-1, ESP 1.9%, density 1.25 kg/dm3. Irrigation, plant protection, and weed control were carried out according to local practices.

Since the early vegetative plant stages, different plant parts were collected for each genotype: young expanded leaves (YL, collected 30 d after vegetative shooting), vegetative leaves (VeL, collected in the vegetative period, 100 d after vegetative shooting), and basal and apical productive leaves (PrBL and PrAL, respectively), obtained from the plant when the main head was at commercial maturity. From heads, harvested at commercial maturity, ExB, ImB, InB, and Recs were manually separated and immediately frozen at -20 °C.

Tissues were collected for 2 y (from September to March 2008 to 2009 and 2009 to 2010) on 3 plants for each of the 6 varietal types considered in this study.

#### Reagents and solvents

Solvents were purchased from J.T. Baker (Deventer, Holland) and were of analytical or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade. Deionized water was used for all the analyses. 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid (CGA), caffeic acid, apigenin 7-O-glucoside, and luteolin 7-O-glucoside (cynaroside) were obtained from Extrasynthese (Lyon, France); 1,3-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid (cynarin Echinacea) and 1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid (cynarin Artichoke) were from ChromaDex Inc. (Santa Ana, Calif., U.S.A.). Formic acid and HPLC grade water were purchased from J.T. Baker. LC-MS grade solvent acetonitrile was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Milan, Italy).

#### Extraction procedure

Polyphenol extraction was performed according to the method of Fratianni and others (2007), with some modifications. Briefly, 0.5 g of each sample were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C in 5 volumes of acetone:ethanol:methanol (70:15:15). The supernatant was collected and the residue was resuspended in 5 volumes of ethyl acetate and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h. The 2 supernatants were separately concentrated to dryness in a Rotavapor 144 R (Buchi, Switzerland) and resuspended in methyl alcohol before being pooled together and subjected to polyphenol characterization.

Polyphenols were extracted from the tissues mentioned previously, and the analyses were repeated for 2 y.

#### HPLC-DAD analysis

HPLC analyses were carried out with a Beckman-Coulter (Fullerton, Calif., U.S.A.) HPLC System Gold chromatograph equipped with a DAD (diode array detector) programmable detector (System Gold, series 166, Beckman-Coulter, Fullerton, Calif., U.S.A.) operated by a 32 Karat software package (Beckman-Coulter, Fullerton, Calif., U.S.A.). A reversed phase column Luna C18 (250 × 4.6 mm i.d., particle size 5μm; Phenomenex, Torrance, Calif., U.S.A.) was employed.

The following gradient system was used with water (containing 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid; solvent A) and 95% acetonitrile (containing 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid; solvent B): 0 min, 90% A and 10% B; 30 min, 50% A and 50% B; 35 min, 0% A and 100% B. Analyses were stopped after 47 min, the eluent was brought back to the initial composition within next 2 min, whereas the equilibration time set to stabilize the column was 10 min. The flow was maintained at 1 mL/min and the injection volume was 10 μL. Diode array detection was between 200 and 600 nm, and absorbance was recorded at 280, 310, and 350 nm.

#### Qualitative and quantitative analysis

Compound identification was achieved by combining different information: positions of absorption maxima (λ max), retention times (min), mass spectra, and the corresponding daughter MS/MS fragments were compared with those from pure standards and/or interpreted with the help of structural models already hypothesized in the literature (Schutz and others 2004; Pandino and others 2010, 2011).

Quantification was made using 6 points (10 to 1000 ppm) calibration curves standards of 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 1,3-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid, caffeic acid, apigenin 7-O-glucoside, luteolin 7-O-glucoside, with _R_2 values ranging between 0.9997 and 0.9999. Monocaffeoylquinic acids were calculated as CGA. Apigenin and luteolin derivatives were calculated as apigenin 7-O-glucoside and luteolin 7-O-glucoside, respectively (Schutz and others 2004).

#### HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS analysis

The high-performance liquid chromatography-diode array detection-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS/MS) system consisted of a capillary HPLC 1290 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, Calif., U.S.A.) equipped with a binary pump solvent delivery, thermostatic column compartment, diode array detector, and a QQQ 6410 mass detector (Agilent Technologies) coupled with a pneumatic nebulizer-assisted electrospray LC-MS interface. A Poroshell column 120 EC-C18 (150 × 2.1 mm i.d., particle size 2.7 μm, Agilent Technologies) was used, with a precolumn Gemini C18 (4 × 2mm i.d., particle size 5 μm; Phenomenex). The following gradient system was used with acetonitrile (solvent A) and water/formic acid (99:1, v/v) (solvent B): 0 min, 5% A and 95% B; 10 min, 13% A and 87% B; 20 min, 15% A and 85% B; 30 min, 22% A and 78% B; 50 min 22% A and 78% B; 55 min 5% A and 95% B; stop time to 70 min. The flow was maintained at 0.2 mL/min; sample injection was 3 μL. Diode array detection was between 200 and 600 nm, and absorbances were simultaneously recorded at 350 nm (luteolin derivatives), 330 nm (apigenin derivatives), 320 nm (hydroxycinnamic acid), and 280 nm (narirutin).

Negative electrospray mode was used for ionization of molecules with capillary voltage at 4000 V. The fragmentor voltage was 140 V and the collision voltage was 15 V. Nitrogen was used both as drying gas at a flow rate of 9 L/min and as nebulizing gas at a pressure of 40 psi. Temperature of drying gas was 350 °C. In the full scan (MS) and product ion (MS/MS) modes, the monitored mass range was from m/z 100 to 1200. Typically, 2 runs were performed during the HPLC-ESI-MS analysis of each sample. First, an MS full-scan acquisition was performed to obtain preliminary information on the predominant m/z ratios observed during the elution. An MS/MS full-scan acquisition was then performed: Quadrupole 1 filtered the calculated m/z of each compound of interest, while Quadrupole 3 scanned for ions produced by nitrogen collision of these ionized compounds in the chosen range at a scan time of 500 ms/cycle. All data were acquired and processed using Mass Hunter software (version B.01.04; Agilent Technologies).

#### Statistical analyses

Analyses were performed in triplicate. All data were subjected to the analysis of variance adopting the General Linear Model for balanced design that provides information about the relationships between categorical predictor variables and response dependent variables. The design is hierarchically nested, because there is a hierarchy of nested factors with consecutive levels: the units of the 1st level ("parts of plant") are nested within the units of the 2nd level ("plant") and so the units of the 2nd level are nested within the units of the 3rd level ("variety"). Then the model ends up crossed with another variable ("year"). The analyses were conducted separately on parts of artichoke head and on leaves. When the _F_-test was significant, means were separated by Student-Newman-Keuls or Duncan test. All calculation and statistical analyses were performed using the appropriate options of Statistica version 7.1 package (Statistica 2005). All data presented are mean values of 6 independent experiments (3 plants for 2 y for each accession) and are expressed as mg/kg of fresh matter (FM).

### Results and Discussion

The study provides a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the phenolic profile for 6 artichoke varietal types cultivated in the Mediterranean area. Polyphenols were measured for 3 bract orders (external, intermediate, and internal), and for the Rec of main flower heads at commercial maturity and in leaves at different developmental stages.

After HPLC separation, 14 compounds were identified, belonging to hydroxycinnamate and flavone groups (Table 1). Identification of some acid compounds (3 to 6 and 11) and flavonoids (8 and 12, Figure 1, Table 1) was based on the comparison of their UV spectra and retention times with those of reference substances. However, HPLC coupled to mass spectrometry was also used to confirm peak assignment and further characterization of individual substances for all compounds. Mass spectrometric behavior (Table 1) was identified on the basis of pseudomolecular ion or fragmentation patterns in the MS and by comparing the elution order with that reported in the literature; in accordance with the methods of Sanchez-Rabaneda and others (2003), Schutz and others (2004), and Romani and others (2006), all the qualitative profiles were identified in each artichoke head part and leaf type.  


Figure 1-. Separation of caffeoylquinic acids and flavonoids in artichoke extracts by HPLC (350 nm). For peak assignment see Table 1.


As shown in Table 2 and 4, the total phenolic content, calculated as the sum of individual phenolic compounds, varied significantly between genotype (_P_ &lt; 0.05) and plant parts (_P_ &lt; 0.01), and on average was higher in leaves than in heads, in accordance with the method of Wang and others (2003). Among the landraces studied, "Violet de Provence" displayed the highest total amount of phenolics in both capitula and in leaves (66658.20 and 82625.63 mg/kg FM, respectively), followed by "Mola" and "Tondo di Paestum," which contained similar amounts of total polyphenols in capitula (36991.12 and 35232.68 mg/kg FM, respectively), and in leaves (53523.69 and 50613.52 mg/kg FM, respectively) in accordance with the method of Bonasia and others (2010) and Lombardo and others (2011), who state that the content of total polyphenols in "Violet de Provence" is one of the highest among the varieties studied. The landraces with the lowest content of total polyphenols in heads was "Bianco di Ostuni," while in leaves was "Sant'Erasmo."  


When parts of the flower head were considered, total polyphenols increased on average from ExB (15697.60 mg/kg) to ImB (35516.57 mg/kg) and InB (56513.87 mg/kg), and were quite high also in the Rec (43021.83 mg/kg FM). As for leaves, Table 3 and 4 show that total measured polyphenols varied significantly (_P_ &lt; 0.01) in different developmental stages of plant leaves: in general, they increased from the vegetative to the productive stage. During the vegetative period of the plant, an increase in polyphenol content could be observed from YL to VeL (average 30282.68 and 46771.77 mg/kg1 FM, respectively). In the reproductive period, PrAL showed a higher amount (62208.93 mg/kg FM) of total polyphenols compared to PrBL (55046.78 mg/kg FM). These data might suggest that a high content of polyphenols in the flower head is ensured either by a _de novo_ synthesis of these compounds or by transport from bottom to top of the plant. Details on phenolic content in all bract orders, Rec, and leaves are given in Table S1 to S8.  


Among the hydroxycinnamic acids detected, the main compounds were CGA and its derivative cynarin, which are synthesized by the plant both in heads and leaves (Sonnante and others 2010). In particular, cynarin content ranged from a minimum of 2655.90 mg/kg FM ("Tondo di Paestum") to 6832.84 mg/kg FM ("Mola") in leaves, and from 11053.11 ("Bianco di Ostuni") to 28787.87 mg/kg FM ("Violet de Provence") in heads. Also CGA showed higher levels in heads (from 287.01 in "Bianco di Ostuni" to 919.98 in "Tondo di Paestum") than in leaves (106.39 to 423.94 mg/kg FM in "S. Erasmo" and "Tondo di Paestum," respectively). In agreement with Schutz and others (2004), these compounds were mainly present in InB. They are typical of artichoke and are important for their choleretic (Gebhart 1997) and antioxidant (Heilmann and others 1995; Fukumoto and others 2000) activity. Furthermore, _in vivo_ studies have demonstrated the anticarcinogenic properties of CGA (Gonthier and others 2003), that can be absorbed directly by the small intestine or hydrolyzed by the microflora of the large intestine to release caffeic acid (Nardini and others 2002; Stalmach and others 2010), which shows the same antioxidant activity as CGA (Rice-Evans and others 1997). The high level of CGA found in artichoke could be explained by its central role as a substrate for biochemical reactions producing several phenolic acids (Wittemer and others 2005).

In our study, we observed considerable decrease of hydroxycinnamic acids, in all genotypes, from InB (immature) to ExB (mature) in accordance with the method of Pandino and others (2011). Polyphenols, and particularly hydroxycinnamates, play significant roles in lignification in plants, and are implicated in cell wall polymer cross-linking (Ralph 2010). It can be, therefore, hypothesized that the reduced amount of these compounds in ExB might be due to the fact that metabolic flux is directed toward the synthesis of lignin. ExB, in fact, contain lignified tissues, and protect the reproductive organs of the plant against biotic and abiotic stresses.

Among flavonoids, luteolin derivatives were the most abundant. The discrepancy with Pandino and others' (2011) results might be explained by the different extraction methods adopted and/or by the different varietal types of artichoke studied.

Particularly, the content of luteolin-7-O-rutinoside was very high in capitula of most artichoke varieties, mainly in "Violet de Provence" (mean value 34043.69 mg/kg FM), except for ExB. Also, this compound increased on average from external to internal parts of the flower head, while a lower content was observed in leaves, where it was especially present in the VeL and PrAL.

Luteolin-7-O-glucoside was very abundant in leaves of all artichoke genotypes, especially in the productive stage. Again, "Violet de Provence" showed the highest amount of this luteolin derivative in each developmental stage, with a mean value of 69658.27 mg/kg FM in leaves. The content of apigenin derivatives had an inverse trend compared to other compounds. As for leaves, the vegetative stage was richer than the productive one. "Blanca de Tudela" showed very low values, while the richest accession was "Mola" (mean value 43.74 and 6477.68 mg/kg FM, respectively). In flower head, apigenin derivative content decreased from ExB to InB and, in the Rec, it was comparable to ImB bracts. Apigenin-7-O-glucuronide was the most abundant apigenin derivative.

In accordance with the method of Romani and others (2006), it is interesting to underline that leaves contain the highest amount of flavonoids; as for capitula, more modest values were found in the bracts, and higher quantities in the Rec.

Flavones exhibit potent biological effects _in vitro_ and _in vivo_, such as inhibition of UV-induced skin carcinogenesis, vasomodulating, antioxidant, and antimicrobial properties (Alijancic and others 1999; Rossoni and others 2005). Luteolin, one of the most common flavones, is thought to play an important role for human health as an antioxidant, a free radical scavenger, an agent in the prevention of inflammation and cancer, a promoter of carbohydrate metabolism, and an immune system modulator (Shimoi and others 1998; Xu and others 2009).

When considering the influence of the year and the plants in the varietal types, no significant difference was observed on polyphenol content (Table 3). It is known that the amount of polyphenolics and antioxidant activities in plants is influenced by biological factors (genotype, organ, and ontogeny), as well as edaphic and environmental (temperature, salinity, water stress, and light intensity) conditions (Howard and others 2002; Giorgi and others 2010). Our results suggest that for artichoke, polyphenol content mainly depends on the genotype and part of the plants. It has to be noted that, while the VeL were collected in the same period for all genotypes, the main flower head was collected at commercial maturity, and therefore, in a different period for early and late flowering varieties, respectively. Therefore, an influence of environment has to be also considered.

In any case, the high content of some potent antioxidants in artichoke substantiates the thought that this vegetable represents an important source of polyphenols with antioxidant and therapeutic activity (Llorach and others 2002), particularly in phytopharmaceutical applications. The edible parts are very rich in caffeoylquinic acids and in some luteolin derivatives, and therefore, constitute a valid source of healthy compounds through direct consumption. However, leaves still retain a high level of 1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid and, especially, luteolin 7-O-glucoside. These compounds are particularly abundant in the top leaves during the productive period.

These results provide useful indications on the bioactive value of some artichoke varieties and for the extraction of health-promoting substances in particular stages of the plant, exploiting both the commercially valuable heads and the leaves.

### Conclusions

The phenolic profile in heads and leaves at different developmental stages was investigated in 6 artichoke varieties. Single polyphenols accumulated preferentially in specific parts of the heads and leaves and in particular stages of the plant growing cycle. Total polyphenols were more abundant in leaves than in heads, indicating that artichoke leaves represent an important source of health-promoting compounds, useful for phytopharmaceutical applications. Cynarin and CGA were the most abundant hydroxycinnammates, while luteolin derivatives were the most abundant flavonols. "Violet de Provence" artichoke proved to retain the highest content of total phenols. A wider utilization of this and other artichoke types should be strongly encouraged for the pharmaceutical industry and not solely for the fresh market, as they are now used.

### Acknowledgments

This research was supported by EU Cynares Project--Agr Gen Res 063 and by a grant from the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance to CNR and ENEA for the project "Innovazione e sviluppo del Mezzogiorno--Conoscenze Integrate per Sostenibilita ed Innovazione del Made in Italy Agroalimentare," Legge n.191/2009.
