# Quercetin-3-O-glucuronide inhibits noradrenaline-promoted invasion of MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells by blocking β2-adrenergic signaling

## Abstract

Endogenous catecholamines such as adrenaline (A) and noradrenaline (NA) are released from the adrenal gland and sympathetic nervous system during exposure to stress. The adrenergic system plays a central role in stress signaling, and excessive stress was found to be associated with increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Overproduction of ROS induces oxidative damage in tissues and causes the development of diseases such as cancer. In this study, we investigated the effects of quercetin-3-_O_-glucuronide (Q3G), a circulating metabolite of quercetin, which is a type of natural flavonoid, on the catecholamine-induced Î²2-adrenergic receptor (Î²2-AR)-mediated response in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells expressing Î²2-AR. Treatment with A or NA at concentrations above 1 Î¼M generated significant levels of ROS, and NA treatment induced the gene expression of heme oxygenase-1 (_HMOX1_), and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (_MMP-2_) and -9 (_MMP9_). Inhibitors of p38 MAP kinase (SB203580), cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) (H-89), activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor (SR11302), and NF-ÎºB and AP-1 (Tanshinone IIA) decreased _MMP2_ and _MMP9_ gene expression. NA also enhanced cAMP induction, RAS activation and phosphorylation of ERK1/2. These results suggested that the cAMP-PKA, MAPK, and ROS-NF-ÎºB pathways are involved in Î²2-AR signaling. Treatment with 0.1 Î¼M Q3G suppressed ROS generation, cAMP and RAS activation, phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and the expression of _HMOX1_, _MMP2_, and _MMP9_ genes. Furthermore, Q3G (0.1 Î¼M) suppressed invasion of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and MMP-9 induction, and inhibited the binding of [3H]-NA to Î²2-AR. These results suggest that Q3G may function to suppress invasion of breast cancer cells by controlling Î²2-adrenergic signaling, and may be a dietary chemopreventive factor for stress-related breast cancer.