# Analysis of total glucosinolates and chromatographically purified benzylglucosinolate in organic and conventional vegetables

## Abstract

The limited availability of foods that are free of pesticides has led Brazil to search for alternative production methods to meet the desires of consumers. Currently, organic cultivation represents a production system that complies with general expectations of producers and consumers. Organic cultivation is particularly interesting mainly because of its effect on plant secondary metabolite content, which may help plants to naturally combat pests; in humans, these substances can also contribute to the prevention of chronic diseases. We report on the extraction of glucosinolates (both as total glucosinolates and as benzylglucosinolate) with trifluoroacetic acid addition in a 70:30 MeOH:water (v/v). Total glucosinolates, determined by a thioglucosidase coupled assay, were measured in different Brassicaceae species and were similar to values reported in the literature. For broccoli, analyses were carried out separately on inflorescences, leaves and stalks; analyses were also conducted on thermally processed samples to simulate cooking. Furthermore, when the analysis was conducted on conventional and organic products, the highest concentrations of these substances were most often found in organically cultivated Brassicaceae. The benzylglucosinolate concentrations were evaluated on the same samples using HPLC. The concentration of benzylglucosinolate was significantly higher in organically cultivated vegetables, as well.