# Docosahexaenoic Acid Inhibited the Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway and Suppressed Breast Cancer Cells in vitro and in vivo

## Abstract

_N-_3 fatty acids (FAs) are essential FAs necessary for human health and are known to possess anticancer properties. However, the relationship between _n_-3 FAs and Î²-catenin, one of the key components of the Wnt signaling pathway, in mouse breast cancer remains poorly characterized. In this study, 4T1 mouse breast cancer cells were exposed to a representative _n_-3 FA, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), to investigate the relationship between _n_-3 FAs and the Wnt/_Î²_-catenin signaling pathway _in vivo_ and _in vitro_. _In vitro_ studies showed that DHA strongly inhibited cell growth, and induced G1 cell cycle arrest both in 4T1 mouse breast cells and MCF-7 human breast cells. DHA reduced _Î²_-catenin expression and T cell factor/lymphoid-enhancing factor reporter activity in 4T1 mouse breast cells. In addition, DHA down-regulated the expression of downstream target genes such as c-_myc_ and cyclinD1. _In vivo_, therapy experiments were conducted on Babl/c mice bearing breast cancer. We found that feeding mouse the 5% fish oil-supplemented diet for 30 days significantly reduced the growth of 4T1 mouse breast cancer _in vivo_ through inhibition of cancer cell proliferation as well as induction of apoptosis. Feeding animals a 5% fish oil diet significantly induced down-regulation of _Î²_-catenin in tumor tissues with a notable increase in apoptosis. In addition, fish oil-supplemented diet decreased lung metastases of breast cancer. These observations suggested that DHA exerted its anticancer activity through down-regulation of Wnt/_Î²_-catenin signaling. Thus, our data call for further studies to assess the effectiveness of fish oil as a dietary supplement in the prevention and treatment of breast cancer.