# Bioprospecting of brown seaweed (Ochrophyta) from the Yucatan Peninsula: cytotoxic, antiproliferative, and antiprotozoal activities

## Abstract

In the Yucatan Peninsula coast, a large diversity of seaweed species are found, and recent studies have reported the presence of metabolites with pharmaceutical importance. In this study, a biological screening of brown seaweed extracts from _Dictyota ciliolata_, _Padina sanctae-crucis_, _Sargassum fluitans_, and _Turbinaria tricostata_ was carried out. Their cytotoxicity and antiproliferative activities were evaluated by the sulforhodamine B assay on human embryonic kidney (HEK 293), human breast cancer (MCF-7), human prostate cancer (LNCaP), and human hepatic cancer (Hep-G2) cell lines. Seaweed extracts were also tested for their anti-trichomonal (_Trichomonas vaginalis_) and anti-giardicidal (_Giardia lamblia_) properties. Fucan fractions were extracted using successive maceration with ethanol/water and freeze-dried. Organics extracts were obtained from ethanol residue from liquid–liquid fractionation. A total of four ethanol extracts, four fucan-rich fractions, four ethanolic extracts, and 12 organic fractions were obtained. Only the ethanolic extracts from _Turbinaria tricostata_ and _D. ciliolata_ were active against LNCaP (CC50 of 24.4 and 29.3 μg mL−1, respectively). Interestingly, the activity found in the extracts from _D. ciliolata_ and _Turbinaria tricostata_ was maintained when both extracts were subjected to a liquid–liquid fractionation with hexane on the LNCaP cell line (CC50 of 24.4 and 25.2 μg mL−1, respectively). The antiproliferative assays showed that both dichloromethane and ethanolic fractions from _P. sanctae-crucis_ were active against MCF-7, with IC50 of 26.1 and 29.8 μg mL−1, respectively. These species have been selected for further bio-guided fractionation and isolation of active compounds.

### Keywords


## Introduction

The search for marine natural products has generated great interest for the pharmaceutical industry, which regards them as a new source of bioactive compounds with medicinal potential (Mayer et al. 2010). In this context, seaweeds have attracted the attention of the pharmaceutical industry, due to the great diversity of species that are available, the ability to produce secondary metabolites with various pharmacological activities, and the ease of obtaining industrial crops (Hu et al. 2011). To date, more than 2,400 natural products with a wide diversity of chemical structures have been isolated mostly from tropical seaweeds (Faulkner 2002). In particular, brown seaweeds have been also characterized for their secondary metabolites, terpene type, and phlorotannin pigments (Blunt et al. 2013), and some of them have been reported to possess cytotoxic activity, antiproliferative, antimicrobial, antiparasitic, and/or antioxidant activities (Ioannou et al. 2011; Kim et al. 2011; Lee and Seo 2011; Pereira et al. 2011; Moghadam et al. 2013). Moreover, brown seaweed fucoidans, a family of sulfated polysaccharides containing fucose, sulfate, and uronic acids, have attracted attention due to their high bioactive properties as antibacterial, anticoagulant, antiviral, and anti-tumoral agents (Jiao et al. 2011; Ale et al. 2011; Dantas-Santos et al. 2012; Dore et al. 2013). Most recently, several patents on the extraction of high-value biologically active materials from seaweed have been published, but generally, the active components have not been fully characterized and they have not been produced using a whole plant approach. Therefore, the determination of whether such bioactive compounds can be isolated as co-products in a process yielding hydrocolloids, lipids, or other components from them is necessary as a possible feedstock for biorefinery (Jung et al. 2013).

Extraction technology is critical for the complete use of seaweed raw materials with low consumption of solvents, reducing time, and with high yields at low costs. On this regard, extraction methods for fucans involve treatments with acid or base solutions, which leads to a possible degradation of other organic compounds, which may have potential applications in the pharmaceutical industry (Rupérez et al. 2002; Nakayasu et al. 2009). However, in recent years, some authors (Ponce et al. 2003; Foley et al. 2011) established a methodology extraction of fucans using water and ethanol alone, without the previous use of acids or bases. Likewise, for the extraction of organic extracts, the used mixtures of dichloromethane/methanol (7:3) or direct maceration give low yields and are not selective for particular compounds polarity. Currently, there is no methodology for extracting fucans and the organic extracts from the same plant material. This would bring advantages in screening studies and a more comprehensive use of brown seaweed products.

In previous studies on brown seaweed from the Yucatan Peninsula, biological activity in the genus _Dictyota_, _Sargassum_, _Padina_, and _Turbinaria_ has been reported (Zubia et al. 2007; Freile-Pelegrin et al. 2008; Moo-Puc et al. 2008; León-Deniz et al. 2009; Moo-Puc et al. 2009; Cantillo-Ciau et al. 2010). In this study, we evaluated cytotoxic, antiproliferative, and antiprotozoal activities of fucans and organic fractions from _Dictyota ciliolata_, _Padina sanctae-crucis_, _Sargassum fluitans_, and _Turbinaria tricostata_ as part of our search for compounds with biological activity and to the integral use of seaweed from the Yucatan Peninsula. The objective of this work is to extract native fucans using a soft chemically modified technique, thus obtaining extracts and organic fractions of the same seaweed sample evaluating its activities with different biological assays. This kind of approach could be implemented in the extraction process to use the waste from one process as a feedstock in the next.

## Material and methods

### Specimens

The material collected consisted of two species from the Dictyotaceae: _Dictyota ciliolata_ Sonder ex Kützing and _Padina sanctae-crucis_ Børgesen and two species of Fucaceae: _Sargassum fluitans_ (Børgesen) Børgesen and _Turbinaria tricostata_ E.S. Barton. All specimens were collected at the Caribbean coast of the Yucatan peninsula in Puerto Morelos (20°46′07″ N, 86°57′14″ O) during the winter of 2012. The seaweeds were centrifuged on site to remove excess seawater using a commercial portable centrifuge and stored in plastic bags on ice during transport to the laboratory. Once in the laboratory, samples were washed thoroughly with fresh water to remove salts, sand, and epiphytes and stored at −20 °C. Voucher specimens for all species were identified according to Wynne (2005) at the MEXU Herbarium (IB-UNAM).

### Fucan extraction

Native fucans were extracted with selective solvents by constant mechanical stirring at different temperature ranges according to the method described by Foley et al. (2011). Seaweeds previously stored (−20 °C) were milled using a commercial blender. Subsequently, milled algae (100 g) were mixed using ethanol (EtOH) (80 % v/v) extraction at room temperature for 12 h. After this time, another extraction was performed for another 12 h at 70 °C. The EtOH supernatants were kept at −4 °C for further use. Successive extraction of the solid residue with Milli-Q H2O was done, first at room temperature for 7 h, then at 70 °C for 7 h, and later at 70 °C for 4 h. The resultant water fractions were treated with CaCl2 in order to precipitate alginates; after alginate removal, the resulting extract was rich in fucoidan. Dialysis was carried out over a 48-h period to decrease salinity using Milli-Q H2O changes every 12 h. Resultant fucans were freeze-dried and stored until required (Fig. 1).


General diagram of the extraction proposed in this study (modified from Foley et al. 2011). _Superscripts_ indicate biological activities obtained from the different species and fractions: 1Cytotoxic activity by _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_; antiproliferative activity by _P. sanctae-crucis_. 2Cytotoxic activity by _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_. 3Antiproliferative activity by _P. sanctae-crucis_. Preliminary fractionation was performed polar fractions by liquid–liquid chromatography: 4using a separating funnel and solvents of increasing polarity

### Fractionation from ethanol extracts

Liquid–liquid chromatography fractionation was carried out by means of a separating funnel. This is a standardized method widely used in chemistry for the separation of molecules making use of the partition coefficient of each molecule. Briefly, the ethanol supernatants were filtered and evaporated under vacuum by means of a rotary evaporator to obtain a dried extract. The ethanol extract was suspended in 150 mL methanol–H2O (1:3) and extracted by funnel separation using 300 mL (once) and with 150 mL (two times) of solvents of increasing polarity: hexane, dichloromethane, and ethyl acetate.

### Preparation of stock solution

Samples of each organic fraction were solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), or H2O/DMSO (1:1) in the case of fucans, prior to be added to the appropriate culture medium and were stocked at a concentration of 10 mg mL−1.

### In vitro antiparasitic assay

_Giardia intestinalis_ strain IMSS:0696:1 was cultured in TYI-S-33 modified medium, supplemented with 10 % calf serum and bovine bile. _Trichomonas vaginalis_ strain GT3 was cultured in TYI-S-33 medium, supplemented with 10 % bovine serum. In vitro growth susceptibility assays were performed using a method previously described (Cedillo-Rivera et al. 2002). Briefly, stock solutions from each extract were added to microtubes containing 1.5 mL of medium in order to reach concentrations of 0.5, 1, 5, and 10 μg mL−1. Subsequently, 4 × 104 trophozoites mL−1 of _Giardia lamblia_ or _Trichomonas vaginalis_ were added to microtubes and incubated for 48 h at 37 ºC. At the end of this period, trophozoites were counted with a hemocytometer, and the inhibitory concentration (IC50) was calculated by nonlinear fit (GraphPad Prim 4 software). Experiments were carried out in triplicate and repeated at least twice. As the negative control, we used DMSO and metronidazole as positive control.

### Cell culture

The cell lines used were hepatocellular carcinoma (Hep-G2, American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)-HB-8065), breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7, ATCC-HTB-22), prostate carcinoma (LNCaP, ATCC-CRL-1740), and a human cell embryonic kidney cell line (HEK-293, ATCC-CRL-1573) from the ATCC. The cells were cultured in sterile Costar T75 flasks containing D-MEM medium (Gibco) (MCF-7 and HEK-293) or RPMI-1640 (Gidco) (LNCaP), supplemented with fetal bovine serum (10 % v/v), 100 U mL−1 penicillin G, and 100 μg mL−1 streptomycin at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5 % CO2 (95 % humidity).

### Cytotoxicity assay

At 70–80 % confluence, cells were detached from the cultured flask by treatment with 0.05 % trypsin–EDTA (Gibco), and a suspension of 1.5 × 104 cells mL−1 of viable cells was seeded in a 96-well microtiter plate (Costar) and incubated for 24 h. When cells reached 80–90 % confluence, the medium was replaced and cells were incubated with stock solutions of extracts serially diluted to reach concentrations of 50.0, 25.0, 12.5, and 6.25 μg mL−1. After 48 h of incubation, viability of the cell lines was evaluated by the sulforhodamine B (SRB) method (Skehan et al. 1990; Moo-Puc et al. 2009). The concentration of the extract that killed 50 % of the cells (CC50) was calculated by nonlinear fit (GraphPad Prism 4 software). All concentrations were evaluated in duplicate, and each experiment was performed in triplicate. The selectivity index (SI) of each extract was calculated as the ratio of cytotoxicity on normal cells to cancer cells (SI = CC50 normal cells/CC50 cancer cells) (Mena-Rejon et al. 2009). It is generally considered that biological efficacy is not due to general toxicity when SI ≥ 10 (Vonthron-Sénécheau et al. 2003).

### Antiproliferative assay

In order to elucidate if the effect of extracts were directly correlated to suppression of cell proliferation, we evaluate the growth inhibition of extracts and fraction from the brown seaweed studied. Cells were cultured in 96-well plates at a concentration of 5 × 104 cells per well, after cultured at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5 % CO2 (95 % humidity). Once the cells reached 70 % confluence, the medium was replaced using same conditions as the cytotoxic assays, except that the medium was replaced with DMEM 10 % SFB to induce cellular proliferation. The growth inhibition of the cell lines was evaluated by the SRB method (Skehan et al. 1990; Moo-Puc et al. 2009). The IG50 value, defined as the extract concentration that resulted in 50 % of cell growth inhibition, was calculated. All concentrations were evaluated in duplicate, and each experiment was performed in triplicate. In both assays (cytotoxic and antiproliferative), docetaxel was used as a positive control, while cells incubated only with 0.05 % of DMSO were used as a negative control. The optical density of the developed plates with SRB was read in a GloMax multi-detection system spectrophotometer at 450 nm (Promega).

### GC–MS analysis

The chromatographic separation and analysis was carried out in a gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) (Agilent, Model 6890N) coupled to a mass selective detector model 5975B. Compounds were separated on an Ultra-1 capillary column (30 m × 0.32 mm, i.e., 0.25 μm film thickness) (J&amp;W Scientific, USA). One microliter of the sample was injected into GC–MS using split mode (50:1). The injector temperature was 250 °C. The column temperature was programmed as follows: initial temperature at 100 °C for 4 min, 10 °C min−1 to 300 °C, and 300 °C for 20 min. Mass detector conditions were electronic impact mode at 70 eV, source temperature 230 °C, scanning rate 1 scan s−1, mass acquisition range 20–600 am, and solvent delay 4 min. Carrier gas was helium at 1 mL min−1. Volatile components present in the seaweed fractions were identified by comparing their mass spectra using NIST Standard Reference Database (version NIST 05).

## Results

### Extraction and fractionation

Yield of extracts and fractions (% of dry weight) obtained from the brown seaweed studied are shown in Table 1. In general, low polarity fraction yields were higher in all four seaweeds. The alga _D. ciliolata_ produced the highest yield for the ethanol extract while _T. tricostata_ yield higher fucans.




The CC50 value is the concentration (μg mL−1) of the extract that killed 50 % of the cells during the assay. Extract activity was considered as: high (≤30 μg mL–1), medium (31–60 μg mL–1), and low (61–99 μg mL–1) as previously established by Moo-Puc et al. (2009)


### Cytotoxic activity

The cytotoxic activities of extracts and fractions from the brown seaweed against four cancer cell lines examined in this study are shown in Table 1. Our results suggest that only ethanolic extracts from _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_ had a high cytotoxic activity (CC50 = 29.3 and 24.4 μg mL–1, respectively) in the LNCaP cell line, while the ethanolic extracts from _S. fluitans_ and _P. sanctae-crucis_ showed moderate and low activity (CC50 = 49.6 and 65.6 μg mL–1, respectively) on the same line. Moderate activity was observed on cell line MCF-7 with _D. ciliolata_ ethanol extract (CC50 = 40.9 μg mL–1) and in _T. tricostata_ methanol extract (CC50 = 56.3 μg mL–1), whereas low activity was found in _P. sanctae-crucis_ and _S. fluitans_ ethanolic extracts (CC50 &gt; 80 μg mL–1). Additionally, the hepatoma cell line Hep-G2 showed a high resistance to all extracts tested, with reduced activity in _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_ extracts (CC50 = 50.3 and 68.2 μg mL–1, respectively).

Liquid–liquid fractionation of the ethanol extracts using hexane, dichloromethane, and ethyl acetate was performed in order to know the nature of the compounds responsible for the biological activity. When _D. ciliolata_ ethanol extract was fractionated, we observed that the cytotoxic activity of the original extract remained in the nonpolar hexane fraction and to a lesser extent in the low polar dichloromethane fraction. The hexane fraction of _D. ciliolata_ showed cytotoxic activity toward LNCaP cell line (CC50 = 24.3 μg mL–1) and moderate activity on Hep-G2 and MCF-7 cell lines (CC50 = 48.4 and 55.4 μg mL–1, respectively). _Turbinaria tricostata_ extracts maintained its cytotoxic activity only in the hexane and ethyl acetate fractions toward LNCaP and MCF-7 cell lines (Table 1). None of the fractions of _P. sanctae-crucis_ and _S. fluitans_ showed cytotoxic activity in the human cancer cell lines tested. Overall, a moderate selectivity of the ethanol extracts and organic fractions from the four brown seaweed studied was found (SI = 1 to 6). None of the fucan fractions from the four brown seaweed studied showed cytotoxic activity to a concentration of 500 μg mL–1 (Table 1).

### Antiproliferative activity

The antiproliferative activity from four ethanolic extracts is summarized in Table 2. Ethanolic extract from _P. sanctae-crucis_ had high antiproliferative activity against MCF-7 (IG50 = 29.8 μg mL–1) and low activity on LNCaP (IG50 = 65.2 μg mL–1) cell lines, while moderate activity was found in the ethanolic extract of _D. ciliolata_ (IG50 = 45.3 μg mL–1) on LNCaP cell line. The extract from _S. fluitans_ showed low activity toward cell lines MCF-7 and LNCaP (IG50 = 69.3 and 76.2 μg mL–1, respectively). None of the extract or fractions of _T. tricostata_ showed antiproliferative activity in the cell lines studied at a concentration &lt;100 μg mL–1. When the fractions obtained from the four extracts were subjected to the antiproliferative assay, only the dichloromethane fraction of _P. sanctae-crucis_ kept its antiproliferative activity for breast cancer lines (MCF-7). Hexane and ethyl acetate fractions from the same species show low activity toward MCF-7 and LNCaP. Moderate antiproliferative activity was also observed in the hexane fraction of _D. ciliolata_ extract toward prostate cancer line (LNCaP). Fucan fractions from the brown seaweed studied did not show significant antiproliferative activity (&gt;500 μg mL−1) (Table 2).




The IG50 value is the extract concentration (μg mL−1) that resulted in 50 % of cell growth inhibition during the assay. Extract activity was considered as: high (≤30 μg mL–1), medium (31–60 μg mL–1), and low (61–99 μg mL–1) as previously established by Moo-Puc et al. (2009)


### Antiprotozoal activity

The activity was tested in two clinically important human parasites (_G. lamblia_ and _Trichomonas vaginalis_), but results show that none of the extracts or fractions had significant activity as low as 13 μg mL−1 (data not shown).

### GC–MS analysis

The constituent compounds from the three most active fractions were analyzed by means of gas chromatography. Figure 2 illustrates the fingerprint of the three fractions with higher activity: cytotoxic (hexane fractions of _T. tricostata_ and _D. ciliolata_) and antiproliferative (dichloromethane fraction of _P. sanctae-crucis_). The chromatograms show that _D. ciliolata_ has five compounds, followed by _P. sanctae-crucis_ with eight compounds, and finally _T. tricostata_ with nine compounds. From the 22 peaks present in the three chromatograms, only four compounds were identified by comparison of their mass spectra with the NIST5 database: Hexadecanoic acid ethyl ester (Rt = 15,154 min) was present in all three fractions and in greater proportion in _P. sanctae-crucis_ fraction (Fig. 2); pentadecanoic acid methyl ester (Rt = 14,481 min) and ethyl ester of (_E_)-9-octadecenoic (Rt = 16,724 min) were detected in _P. sanctae-crucis_; while the compound 6, 10, 14-trimethyl-2-pentadecanone (Rt = 13,676 min) was only identified in the _D. ciliolata_ fraction. Two common unknown peaks (Rt = 25.8 and 13,785 min) were detected in both _P. sanctae-crucis_ and _T. tricostata_.


Chromatograms obtained from _A_ hexane active fraction from _D. ciliolata_, _B_ hexane active fraction from _Turbinaria tricostata_, and _C_ dichloromethane active fraction from _P. sanctae-crucis_. GC–MS: ultra-1 capillary column. The injector temperature was 250 °C. The column temperature was programmed as follows: initial temperature at 100 °C for 4 min, 10 °C min−1 to 300 °C, 300 °C for 20 min. Hexadecanoic acid ethyl ester (Rt = 15,154 min) was present in all three fractions; pentadecanoic acid methyl ester (Rt = 14,481 min) and ethyl ester of (_E_)-9-octadecenoic (Rt = 16,724 min) were detected in _P. sanctae-crucis_; 6, 10, 14-trimethyl-2-pentadecanone (Rt = 13,676 min) was only identified in the _D. ciliolata_ fraction. Two common unknown peaks (Rt = 25.8 and 13,785 min) were detected in both _P. sanctae-crucis_ and _T. tricostata_

## Discussion

Most of the published literatures on the screening compounds from seaweeds evaluate organic or aqueous extracts separately, focusing basically toward a main type of compounds (either organics or polysaccharides) and mainly using extraction by maceration (Mhadhebi et al. 2011; Mary et al. 2012; Stabili et al. 2012). In this paper, our proposal evaluated a simple protocol for extraction of both polysaccharide-rich extracts (mostly fucans) and other usable organic extracts. The yields for organic extracts reported in the literature are ∼8 % in _Dictyota_, ∼2.5 % in _Padina_, ∼2 % in _Sargassum_, and ∼2 % in _Turbinaria_ (Freile-Pelegrin et al. 2008; Moo-Puc et al. 2008; León-Deniz et al. 2009; Moo-Puc et al. 2009). Fucan yields are quite variable depending on the species from which they were extracted and the method used for extraction. Nevertheless, previous studies suggest that generally fucans have a yield ranging between 3 and 12 % (Foley et al. 2011). In this study, comparable yields were obtained for both organic extracts and fucans (Table 1).

On the other hand, ethanol extracts from _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_ showed high cytotoxic activity, whereas ethanolic extract of _P. sanctae-crucis_ had high antiproliferative activity, demonstrating that cytotoxic and antiproliferative assays are not directly related. These results could suggest that the main pharmacological mechanism of each extract is different; thus, _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_ compounds may be related to necrosis or apoptosis, while _P. sanctae-crucis_ compounds may be responsible for the antiproliferative activity by inhibiting cell cycle.

Liquid–liquid chromatography led us to identify the polarity of the active compounds present in the crude extracts of the brown seaweed studied. The hexane fractions of _D. ciliolata_ and _T. tricostata_ had an effect for prostate cancer (LNCaP), whereas dichloromethane fraction from _P. sanctae-crucis_ was the most active toward breast cancer (MCF-7). These data demonstrate the nonpolar nature of the active compounds in all the three fractions.

Isolated diterpenes from the genus _Dictyota_ have been reported to exert cytotoxic and protective DNA damage activities (Gedara et al. 2003; Jongaramruong and Kongkam 2007; Ayyad et al. 2011). This genus has been extensively investigated from a chemical viewpoint and is regarded as a rich source of these compounds (Teixeira et al. 2001; Vallim et al. 2005; Viano et al. 2009). Moreover, from _D. ciliolata_, prenylated guaiane and xenicane like-type diterpenes have been isolated (Cronin et al. 1995; Manzoa et al. 2011). However, there is no information indicating cytotoxic activity of these compounds from this species. We are currently isolating and elucidating the compounds present in the hexane fraction of _D. ciliolata_. Although we do not know at the moment the chemical compounds responsible for the observed activity of the species from which we isolated some of the bioactive chemical compounds, these are related to the same genera that have been previously studied. In particular for the genus _Dictyota_, diterpenes with cytotoxic properties have been described (Ayyad et al. 2011). Nevertheless, the pharmacological mechanism by which guaiane and xenicane like-type diterpenes exert their cytotoxic effect is not known; therefore, pharmacological studies on cell lines using these compounds are needed.

Previous studies with the genus _Turbinaria_ have isolated compounds with potent cytotoxic activity such as turbinaric acid (Asari et al. 1989) and oxygenated sterols (Sheu et al. 1997, 1999) that can be responsible for the cytocidal effect observed in this study. To our knowledge, there are not reports in the literature on biological and/or phytochemistry of _T. tricostata_.

In relation to the genus _Padina_, very few studies have been published regarding biological activity and chemical composition. Two previous studies with _Padina pavonica_ indicate the presence of oxygenated sterols and diterpenes with cytotoxic active compounds (Ktari and Guyot 1999; Awad et al. 2008). The compound 24(_R_)-hydroproxy-24-vinylcholesterol is an oxygenated sterol previously isolated from other species of _Turbinaria_ and _Padina_. This is a potent cytotoxic compound, which main pharmacological mechanism is the induction of apoptosis and it has been described for the brown algae _Nizamuddinia zanardinii_ (Moghadam et al. 2013). The biological activity observed in _T. tricostata_ and _P. sanctae-crucis_ extracts could be related to the presence of this compound; however, these should be studied further.

In our results, we showed antiproliferative activity of the dichloromethane fraction; therefore, it is important to isolate compounds from this fraction to identify the main compound responsible for such activity. As to the chemical composition of the three most active fractions, we observed similarities from the GC–MS spectra, especially in the presence of fatty acid esters. It is well-known that seaweed produce mostly saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons (Patarra et al. 2012; Pereira et al. 2012). However, the chromatograms and mass data fragmentation studies indicate that other type of compounds may also be present in these species (data not shown). In fact, from the chemotaxonomical point of view, it is known from the literature that the genus _Dictyota_ produces mainly diterpenes, _Turbinaria_ oxygenated sterols and sterols, and _Padina_ contains both types of compounds (Sheu et al. 1997, 1999; Ktari and Guyot 1999; Vallim et al. 2005; Awad et al. 2008). In this study, we performed a preliminary fingerprint on the chemical composition of the three most active fractions of _D. ciliolata_, _T. tricostata_, and _P. sanctae-crucis_, in order to learn more on the chemical compounds present in these species and lay the groundwork for further studies and biotechnological applications.

In conclusion, these results confirm that the methodology proposed is a simple, selective, and a suitable alternative for obtaining both fucans and organic fractions from same plant material. The versatility and assurance to fully utilize biomass to screening and biological testing of organic extracts and fucans must be studied in detail in order to optimize the recovery of other useful products (alginates and/or solid residues) for possible application. Therefore, further studies are needed in order to evaluate the possibility of using up to 100 % of the biomass available of these or other abundant brown seaweeds in tropical coastal areas. Additionally, we propose a bio-guided isolation of the compounds responsible for the biological activity present, with the purpose of being used as pharmaceutical entities or for the standardization of herbal medicines.

### Acknowledgments

The first author acknowledges a postdoctoral fellowship under the research project SEP-CONACYT (CB-83386-Z). The authors thank J.L. Godinez (IB-UNAM) for identification of seaweed species and C. Chávez and M.L. Zaldivar for technical assistance during analysis.
