# Synergistic effect between celecoxib and luteolin is dependent on estrogen receptor in human breast cancer cells

## Abstract

The anti-cancer effects of celecoxib and luteolin are well known. Although our previous study demonstrated that the combination of celecoxib and luteolin synergistically inhibits breast tumor growth compared with each of the treatments alone, we did not uncover the molecular mechanisms of these effects. The aims of our present study were to compare the effects of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in four different human breast cell lines and to determine the mechanisms of action in vitro and in vivo. The synergistic effects of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment yielded significantly greater cell growth inhibition in all four breast cancer cell lines compared with the single agents alone. In particular, combined celecoxib and luteolin treatment significantly decreased the growth of MDA-MB-231 cancer cells in vivo compared with either agent alone. The celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment induced synergistic effects via Akt inactivation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling inhibition in MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells and via Akt inactivation and ERK signaling activation in MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells. These results demonstrate the synergistic anti-tumor effect of the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in different four breast cancer cell lines, thus introducing the possibility of this combination as a new treatment modality.

### Keywords


## Introduction

The anti-cancer effects of celecoxib and luteolin are well known. The inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) by celecoxib has pro-apoptotic effects in breast cancer. Several studies have demonstrated the anti-oncogenic mechanism of this COX-2 inhibitor as well as the association between celecoxib treatment and significant improvements in the survival of patients with breast cancer [1–11]. Luteolin, or 3′,4′,5,7-tetrahydroxyflavone, is a common flavonoid. The anti-cancer properties of luteolin are associated with apoptosis induction, redox regulation, DNA damage, protein kinase and cell proliferation inhibition, and metastasis and angiogenesis suppression [12, 13].

For anti-cancer treatments, combinatorial strategies can provide synergistic tumor growth inhibition and reduced systemic toxicity relative to each of the monotherapeutic regimens alone [14–16]. Based on these data, our previous study demonstrated that a combination of celecoxib and luteolin provides better breast cancer cell growth inhibition than either treatment alone in two human breast cancer cell lines (estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7 human breast cancer cells and ER-negative MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells) [17].

However, recent advances in our molecular technique-based understanding of breast cancer biology have allowed us to divide breast cancers into at least four subtypes, especially ER-positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2)-negative, ER-positive/HER-2-positive, ER-negative/HER-2-negative, and ER-negative/HER-2-positive [18, 19]. Therefore, HER-2 expression is an important determinant of proper breast cancer treatment.

The aims of our present study were to compare the effects of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in four different human breast cancer cell lines that are distinguished according to ER and HER-2 expression and to subsequently determine the mechanisms of action in vitro and in vivo.

## Materials and methods

### Antibodies and reagents

Antibodies and reagents were purchased from the following commercial sources: celecoxib and luteolin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA), and 2-[2-amino-3-methoxyphenyl]-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (PD98059); 2-[4-morpholinyl]-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (LY294002); anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA); anti-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2; phospho-specific anti-ERK1/2; phosphorylated Ser473 Akt, Akt, Bcl-2, Bax, Bad, Bak, and PARP; and cleaved PARP antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Beverly, MA, USA).

### Cell lines and cell cultures

Four human breast cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA): the ER-positive/HER-2-negative MCF-7 cells, the ER-positive/HER-2-positive MCF7/HER18 cells, the ER-negative/HER-2-negative MDA-MB-231 cells, and the ER-negative/HER-2-positive SkBr3 cells. The cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma Chemical Co.) supplemented with heat-inactivated 10 % fetal bovine serum, 300 mg/L l-glutamine, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaHCO3, 100 μg/mL of streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin. The cells were grown in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with a 5 % CO2 atmosphere.

### Cell survival assay

The effects of celecoxib and luteolin on human breast cancer cell growth were determined using an 2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner salt (XTT) assay (Roche, Germany). The XTT assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. One thousand cells were seeded in triplicate in six-well plates either with or without celecoxib and/or luteolin and were assayed after 72 h. Following the incubation, celecoxib-treated cells were fixed in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma Chemical Co.), and luteolin-treated cells were fixed in isopropyl alcohol (Duksan Pure Chemicals, Co., Ltd.). Following fixation, the cells were analyzed using the XTT cell proliferation kit (Roche, Germany). Absorbance at 570 nm was read on an automated spectrophotometric miniplate reader (EL808 ultramicroplate reader; Bio-Tek Instruments, Inc., Winooski, VT, USA). The values were normalized and plotted as the percent change relative to control cells (mean ± standard error of the mean).

### Isobologram analysis

The data from the XTT assay were analyzed using CalcuSyn software (Biosoft). This software package analyzes the combined effects of drugs and automatically determines synergism and antagonism. CalcuSyn performs multiple drug dose-effect calculations according to the median effect methods described by Chou and Talalay [20]. In the isobologram graph, a point above the oblique line is considered an antagonistic effect, a point below the oblique line is considered a synergistic effect, and a point on the line is considered an additive effect. A combination index (CI) &lt;1.0 is indicative of synergy, an additive effect yields a CI of 1.0, and antagonism results in a CI &gt;1.0.

### Western blotting

The cells were lysed, and the protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad colorimetric assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). The lysates were analyzed via Western blotting after resolution on 10 % sodium dodecyl sulfate gels. The gel lanes were each loaded with 50 μg of protein and electrophoresed for 2 h at 90 V. Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5 % nonfat dry milk and incubated with antibodies directed against PCNA, Bcl-2, Bax, Bad, Bak, Akt, p-Akt, PARP, cleaved PARP, ERK, and phospho-ERK overnight at 4 °C. The membranes were then washed and incubated with a secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. The membranes were subsequently developed, and protein signals were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence Western blotting detection reagent (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK). The membranes were incubated with an antibody against actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA) to ensure equal protein loading, and the results were subjected to densitometry analysis.

### Apoptosis assay

Apoptotic human breast cancer cells were identified via annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide (PI) staining. Annexin V-FITC and PI staining was performed using a detection kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (BD Pharmingen). A total of 1 × 105 cells/mL were incubated with celecoxib and/or luteolin for 72 h. The cells were subsequently washed with cold PBS and suspended in 100 mL of buffer (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaOH (pH 7.4), 140 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2). After the addition of 5 μL each of annexin V-FITC and PI, the cells were incubated for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Following this incubation, 400 mL of binding buffer solution was added, and the cells were analyzed via flow cytometry.

### Inhibition assay

Human breast cancer cells were cultured with a mitogen-activated and extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor (20 μM PD98059) or a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor (10 μM LY294002) for 2 h in the dark. Next, celecoxib and luteolin were added for the indicated time periods. The numbers of apoptotic cells were measured via annexin V-FITC/PI staining.

### In vivo xenograft tumor model

We used a nude mouse xenograft model to assess the anti-cancer efficacy of celecoxib and luteolin as mono-therapies or as a combined therapy in vivo. The animal protocol was approved by the Catholic University of Korea St. Vincent’s Hospital Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Briefly, female BALB/c nude mice (6–7 weeks old) were purchased from Deahanbiolink (Kyounggi-do, Korea) and maintained in a specific pathogen-free facility. MDA-MB-231 cells (2 × 107) were inoculated s.c. into the right flanks of the mice. After 7 days, 20 tumor-bearing mice were randomly divided into four groups for treatment with celecoxib and/or luteolin. The first control group was treated with vehicle (10 % DMSO). The second, third, and fourth groups were treated i.p. twice weekly (every Monday and Thursday) as follows: celecoxib (30 mg/kg), luteolin (30 mg/kg), and celecoxib (30 mg/kg) + luteolin (30 mg/kg), respectively. The mice were weighed, and the tumors were measured with calipers every 3 or 4 days. The tumor volumes were calculated according to the following formula: (largest diameter × smallest diameter2) / 2. On the final day of treatment, the mice were sacrificed by CO2 inhalation. The tumors were excised and fixed in formalin, and paraffin-embedded blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 7 μm. The cleaved PARP and PCNA protein levels in the xenografted tumor tissues were evaluated via immunohistochemical staining.

### Statistical analyses

Statistical analyses were performed to compare the control and treatment groups as well as the different experimental groups. Continuous data are presented as the mean and standard error deviations with median values. Comparisons of the means were performed using one-way ANOVA. Differences with a value of _p_ &lt; 0.05 were considered significant.

## Results

### Celecoxib and luteolin combination therapy exhibited synergistic apoptotic effects on four human breast cancer cell lines

Four breast cancer cell lines were treated with celecoxib and/or luteolin at various concentrations, and cancer cell viability was measured using an XTT assay. Celecoxib treatment alone induced gradual dose-dependent growth inhibition in all four breast cancer cell lines (_p_ &lt; 0.05). The 20 % inhibitory concentration (IC20) values of celecoxib were 45, 40, and 60 μM in MCF-7, MCF7/HER18, and MDA-MB-231 cells, respectively. In SkBr3 cells, 60 μM celecoxib reduced cell viability to 10 % of the controls after 72 h (Fig. 1a–d). The IC20 values of celecoxib in MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells were higher than those in MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells.


Celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment synergistically inhibits the survival of human breast cancer cell lines. Four breast cancer cell lines were incubated with different concentrations of celecoxib, luteolin, or a celecoxib and luteolin combination for 72 h. Cell viability was determined using XTT assays (a–d). The combination indices (CI) were calculated using the CalcuSyn software. A CI value &lt;1 indicates synergy (e–h)

Luteolin treatment alone induced gradual dose-dependent growth inhibition in three breast cancer cell lines (_p_ &lt; 0.05). At a concentration of 30 μM, luteolin reduced the MCF-7 cell viability to 30 % of that in the controls after 72 h. The luteolin IC20 value was 30 μM in MCF7/HER18 cells and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, luteolin treatment alone did not induce evident apoptosis in SkBr3 cells (Fig. 1a–d).

As shown in Fig. 1a–d, the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment significantly reduced cancer cell viability and demonstrated greater efficacy in inducing tumor cell death compared with the individual drugs or the controls in all four human breast cancer cell lines after 72 h of treatment (_p_ = 0.01).

The synergistic apoptotic effects of the celecoxib and luteolin combined treatment in the four breast cancer cells were determined via an isobologram analysis. The celecoxib/luteolin concentration ratios were 3:2 in MCF-7 cells (15 + 10 μM, 30 + 20 μM, 45 + 30 μM, 60 + 40 μM, 75 + 50 μM, and 100 + 75 μM) and 4:3 in MCF7/HER18 cells (20 + 15 μM, 40 + 30 μM, 60 + 45 μM, and 80 + 60 μM). Furthermore, the celecoxib/luteolin concentration ratio was 2:1 in both MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells (40 + 20 μM, 50 + 25 μM, 60 + 30 μM, 70 + 35 μM, and 80 + 40 μM). As shown in Fig. 1e–h, the CI values of these concentrations were &lt;1, indicating that celecoxib and luteolin may be an effective combination for inhibiting cell growth due to their synergistic efficacy in all four breast cancer cells.

To evaluate the nature of cell apoptosis and proliferation in breast cancer cells following celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment, PARP cleavage and PCNA expression were investigated via Western blotting (Fig. 2a). When celecoxib and luteolin were combined, significant PARP cleavage was observed, and PCNA expression levels were reduced after 72 h of treatment. We can conclude that celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment-induced breast cancer cell death is mediated by apoptotic and anti-proliferative effects.


Determination of the nature of the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment-induced human breast cancer cell apoptosis and proliferation. After treating human breast cancer cells with celecoxib, luteolin, or a combination, the protein expression profiles of total PARP, cleaved PARP, and PCNA were analyzed via Western blotting with specific antibodies (a). The percentages of apoptotic cell death were determined via annexin V-FITC and PI staining followed by flow cytometry analysis (b–e). _p_ &lt; 0.05

To quantitatively determine the point at which the celecoxib and luteolin combination increased apoptosis, all four breast cancer cells were treated with celecoxib alone, luteolin alone, or a combination of celecoxib and luteolin for 72 h. The percentage of apoptotic cell death was measured via annexin V-FITC and PI staining followed by flow cytometry analysis. As shown in Fig. 2b–e, the increase in the proportion of cells undergoing apoptosis was significantly higher following celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in both cell lines compared with celecoxib or luteolin alone (_p_ = 0.01).

### Determination of the proteins involved in the increased apoptosis observed in vitro

To investigate the common mechanistic basis of apoptosis in the context of the synergistic effect of celecoxib and luteolin, the expression of a panel of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2-related proteins was investigated via Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 3a, significant increases in the expression of the Bax, Bad, and Bak proteins were observed in all four breast cancer cell lines subjected to celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment relative to cells treated with celecoxib or luteolin treatment alone. However, there was no significant difference in the Bcl-2 protein expression levels. Therefore, an increase in the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins might be responsible for the increased apoptosis observed with the combination treatment.


Identification of factors involved in the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment-induced human breast cancer cell apoptosis. To investigate the common mechanistic basis of apoptosis in the context of the synergistic effect of celecoxib and luteolin, the expression levels of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2-related proteins, ERK, phospho-ERK, Akt, and phospho-Akt were examined via Western blotting (a). The MAP/ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 and PI3K inhibitor LY294002 were used to evaluate whether ERK phosphorylation and Akt inactivation, respectively, are required for apoptosis. The percentages of apoptotic cell death were measured via annexin V-FITC and PI staining followed by flow cytometry analysis (b–e). _p_ &lt; 0.05

### Celecoxib and luteolin-induced apoptosis is mediated through the ERK pathway and Akt inactivation

The third member of the canonical mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, ERK, regulates multiple signal transduction pathways involved in a variety of functions. ERK activation through different pathways leads to fundamentally different cellular responses, including proliferation, differentiation, survival, and memory consolidation [21–23]. As shown in Fig. 3a, the phospho-ERK1/2 levels in MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells treated with a combination of celecoxib and luteolin were reduced compared with those in cells treated with celecoxib or luteolin alone, whereas phospho-ERK1/2 levels were increased in MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells treated with a combination of celecoxib and luteolin. The specific MAP/ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 was used in our study to determine whether phospho-ERK1/2 activation was required for apoptosis. As shown in Fig. 3b–e, following celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment, PD98059 significantly accelerated apoptosis in MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells but significantly inhibited apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells.

The PI3 kinase/Akt pathway plays a regulatory role in the pro-oncogenic pathway [2, 9]. The downregulation of PI3 kinase/Akt pathway activity stimulates apoptosis by inhibiting Akt phosphorylation. To determine whether Akt phosphorylation was inhibited in celecoxib and luteolin combination-treated cells, Akt and phospho-Akt levels were analyzed via Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 3a, significant decreases in the phospho-Akt levels were observed in all four breast cancer cell lines following treatment with the celecoxib and luteolin combination versus treatment with celecoxib or luteolin alone. To assess the role of inhibited Akt phosphorylation in the induction of apoptosis following treatment with a celecoxib and luteolin combination, the cell-permeable PI3K inhibitor LY294002 was used to inhibit the Akt pathway. As shown in Fig. 3b–e, LY294002 significantly accelerated apoptosis in all four breast cancer cell lines following treatment with combined celecoxib and luteolin.

### Celecoxib and luteolin suppress breast tumor xenograft growth

To confirm our in vitro results, we tested the synergistic anti-cancer effect of celecoxib and luteolin in a nude mouse xenograft model. As shown in Fig. 4a, at the end of the overall treatment period, treatment with celecoxib alone, but not luteolin alone, reduced MDA-MB-231 tumor volumes relative to those in vehicle-treated mice. However, the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment significantly reduced MDA-MB-231 tumor volumes relative to those in mice subjected to other treatments (_p_ &lt; 0.05). As tumor growth is regulated by both reduced apoptosis and increased proliferation, we assessed the levels of cleaved PARP and PCNA (Fig. 4b, c). The levels of cleaved PARP were markedly decreased, and those of PCNA were markedly increased in the MDA-MB-231 tumors (_p_ &lt; 0.05). These results indicate that the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment increased tumor apoptosis and decreased tumor proliferation.


Inhibitory effect of the celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in vivo. Female BALB/c nude mice were injected with MDA-MB-231 cells (2 × 107). The animals were administered the following treatments twice weekly by i.p. injection (every Monday and Thursday): vehicle (10 % DMSO), celecoxib (30 mg/kg), luteolin (30 mg/kg), or celecoxib (30 mg/kg) + luteolin (30 mg/kg). The mice were weighed, and the tumors were measured with calipers every 3 or 4 days. The tumor sizes were compared among the treatment groups (a). The _vertical bars_ on the tumor growth curve chart indicate the standard errors. The tumors were excised and fixed in formalin, and paraffin-embedded blocks were sectioned at a thickness of 7 μm. The cleaved PARP (original magnification, ×400; b) and PCNA (original magnification, ×200; c) protein levels in the xenografted tumor tissues were evaluated via immunohistochemical staining. The overall intensity level (range, 0–300; intensity score × percentage or area staining) was used to evaluate protein expression levels. The _error bars_ represent the standard errors of the scores. _p_ &lt; 0.05

## Discussion

The ability of cytotoxic agents to limit tumor growth might be due to their capacity to induce cancer cell apoptosis and reduce cancer cell proliferation. The anti-cancer effects of celecoxib and luteolin are well known. However, the anti-cancer mechanisms of celecoxib and luteolin in each of the four breast cancer subtypes used in this study have not yet been well characterized. Although our previous study initially demonstrated a synergistic apoptotic effect of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells), it had several limitations [17]. Therefore, we investigated the synergistic apoptotic effect of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in four breast cancer cell lines and an in vivo xenograft tumor model.

In the current study, the treatment of four human breast cancer cells with a celecoxib and luteolin combination yielded a synergistic effect on cell death compared with treatment with either drug alone. Furthermore, our results suggest that apoptosis is the main mechanism of cell death in the four human breast cancer cell lines following treatment with the combination of celecoxib and luteolin. However, the doses of celecoxib and luteolin required to achieve the same apoptotic effect were higher for MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells (ER-negative cells) than for MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells (ER-positive cells). This result might be explained by luteolin’s anti-estrogenic activity [13]. Luteolin may function as an anti-estrogenic agent by competing with estrogens for ER receptor binding. Furthermore, luteolin reduces ER expression levels by inhibiting ER gene transcription or potentiating ER protein degradation [13, 24, 25]. Indeed, luteolin is able to inhibit DNA synthesis and proliferation in mammary epithelial cells and breast cancer cell induced by estrogen, both in vitro and in vivo [24, 26]. These reports suggest that luteolin’s anti-estrogenic activity could at least partly contribute to its anti-proliferative effects on ER-positive breast cancer cells.

The MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways are critical for breast cancer cell signal transduction [27]. Akt is a serine/threonine-specific protein kinase that phosphorylates effectors within cell survival, proliferation, and metabolism-related pathways [27]. Many studies concur with the general view that celecoxib and luteolin increase apoptosis by inactivating the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway [2, 4, 5, 9, 13, 17, 28]. Celecoxib inhibits prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which is the major downstream effecter of COX-2, and inhibits apoptosis by stimulating the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway. Furthermore, celecoxib can bind to and inhibit 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1). PDK1 is an essential component of cell growth and survival signaling pathways involving PI3K (upstream of PDK1) and Akt/PKB, downstream of PDK1 [2, 5, 9]. As an anti-cancer agent, luteolin is also able to inhibit the IGF-1-induced activation of IGF-1R and Akt and the phosphorylation of Akt [29]. Our results showed that the combination of celecoxib and luteolin leads to synergistic breast tumor cell apoptosis and results in a significant reduction in phosphorylated Akt compared to treatment with only one drug or the controls. Importantly, our study provided strong evidence to support the conclusion that the enhanced apoptosis observed with combination treatment (celecoxib and luteolin) and a PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) is associated with a reduction in phosphorylated Akt.

Of the three major MAPK pathways, the ERK pathway is the most relevant to breast cancer [30, 31]. However, based on previous evidences, the ERK pathway activates either an apoptotic signal or a survival signal, counteracts pro-apoptotic effects, in different cancer cell types treated with different chemotherapeutic agents [21–23, 32, 33]. In the present study, we provided evidence that ERK signaling inhibition is an important step in the induction of celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment-induced apoptosis in ER-positive breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MCF7/HER18 cells). However, increased ERK activity was observed in ER-negative breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 and SkBr3 cells) during celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, our study provided important evidence that enhanced apoptosis occurred in combination-treated ER-positive but not ER-negative breast cancer cells treated with the MEK1 inhibitor (PD98059). These discrepant findings may be attributed to significant levels of cross talk between kinases in the PI3K and MAPK pathways in different breast cancer cells [28]. The relationship between the PI3K and MAPK pathway is complex and not completely understood [34, 35]. Furthermore, in breast cancer cells, this molecular circuit is further complicated by additional cross talk between ERK and PI3K and other pathways, including important ER signaling cascades [28]. Therefore, there is a need to characterize the biology of the canonical cascades involving the ERK, PI3K, and ER signaling pathways in response to celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment in greater detail. This characterization will help identify breast cancer subtypes that will experience the strongest anti-tumor effects from celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment.

In summary, this study demonstrated that a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment yielded synergistic effects in four different breast cancer cell lines and suppressed triple-negative (ER-negative and HER-2 negative) breast tumor growth in vivo, findings that warrant further evaluation. Based on these strong pre-clinical data, a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment might provide clinical benefits for breast cancer. Although this hypothesis requires testing in clinical trials, we have shown the synergistic anti-tumor effects of a celecoxib and luteolin combination treatment on four different breast cancer cell lines, thus introducing the possibility of this combination as a new treatment modality. Furthermore, celecoxib and luteolin, when used in combination with other anti-cancer drugs, may improve the therapeutic value of the combined agents by allowing the use of lower sub-toxic doses to achieve a more effective cancer treatment.

### Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Medical Research Center, Catholic University of Korea St. Vincent’s Hospital.

### Conflicts of interest

