# Dietary patterns and breast cancer: a case-control study in women

## Abstract

### Purpose

Since dietary habits have been associated with breast cancer, the tested research hypothesis was the associations between food patterns, as derived through multivariate methods, and breast cancer.

### Methods

In a case–control study, Two-hundred and fifty consecutive, newly diagnosed breast cancer female patients (56 ± 12 years) and 250 one-to-one age-matched, healthy controls were studied. A standardized, validated questionnaire assessing various socio-demographic, clinical, lifestyle, and dietary characteristics was applied through face-to-face interviews. Factor analysis, with principal components method, was applied to extract dietary patterns from 86 foods or food groups consumption reported by the controls.

### Results

Three components were derived explaining 43 % of the total variation in consumption. Component 1 was characterized by the consumption of potatoes, red meat and its products, poultry and white meat, dairy products, use of margarine/butter in cooking or at the table, consumption of sausages, fried food as well as grilled meat or fish; component 2 was characterized by the consumption of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables; and component 3 was characterized by olive oil and fish consumption. After adjusting for various confounders, components 2 and 3 were favorably associated with the absence of having breast cancer [odds ratio (OR) 0.60, 95 % CI 0.47–0.75 and OR 0.81, 95 % CI 0.66–0.99, respectively], while component 1 was not significantly associated with the disease.

### Conclusions

Adherence to healthy dietary patterns (including whole grains, fruits, and vegetables, olive oil, and fish) seems to be favorable in not having breast cancer, among middle-aged women.

### Keywords


## Introduction

Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer death in females, worldwide, accounting for 23 % (i.e., 1.38 million) of the total new cancer cases and 14 % (458,400) of the total cancer deaths in 2008. About half the breast cancer cases and 60 % of the deaths are estimated to occur in economically developing countries [1].

With respect to diet and breast cancer risk, during the last decades, studies from all over the world have evaluated the relationship between specific foods and some of their compounds as well as dietary habits with the development of breast cancer [2, 3]. Among them, alcohol drinking is widely recognized as one of the behaviors most consistently associated with breast cancer risk [4]. Moreover, the evidence for the World Cancer Research Fund and the American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) report is suggestive of an increase in breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women consuming higher-fat diets as compared with those consuming lower-fat diets [4]. Furthermore, soy food consumption seems to be inversely associated with the risk of breast cancer among the Asian women [5], while increased consumption of total dairy food but not milk may be also associated with a reduced risk of the disease [6]. In contrast, studies that have evaluated the role of red meat and/or processed meat and breast cancer risk provide inconsistent results, while the relationship between greater fruit and vegetable consumption and reduced risk for breast cancer has not been consistently demonstrated [3, 4].

However, it should be noted that the majority of previous studies followed the approach of assessing single nutrients or food items, instead of assessing dietary patterns. Nevertheless, it is accepted that people do not eat isolated nutrients, but they consume meals consisting of a variety of foods with complex combinations of micro- and macronutrients. Moreover, food-specific analyses in relation to the characteristics of people or incidence of a disease share many methodological limitations (i.e., high collinearity of the food variables, inability to test for the synergistic effects of foods, etc.). Thus, during the last years, several investigators in the field of nutritional epidemiology have suggested using a holistic dietary approach when exploring its impact on disease prevention, giving much attention in pattern analysis [7, 8]. Two basic methodologies have been proposed for assessing dietary patterns in nutrition epidemiology studies. The first one is based on a priori defined “healthy” dietary patterns (i.e., Mediterranean diet, step I AHA diet, other recommendations illustrated in food pyramids). To measure the level of adherence to these patterns, special indexes have been proposed that capture into a single score the magnitude of adherence to the specific pattern [8–12]. The second methodological procedure is based on multivariate statistical methods [13], such as principal components analysis (PCA), cluster, or factor analysis. All these methodologies may consider as a posterior techniques and an alternative of the use of diet scores. They have emerged as methods to empirically derive dietary (or food) patterns and possibly explain nutrient–disease relations [13, 14]. Among them, factor analysis is the method most commonly used since it evaluates the correlations between all food consumption variables and reveals similarities in the habits of people. Afterward, the application of the classical statistical methods, like multiple regression analysis, may reveal whether a food or dietary pattern (component) is associated with a specific disease like the breast cancer.

Therefore, following the holistic dietary assessment approach, in the present work, the tested research hypothesis was the evaluation of the odds of adherence to certain dietary patterns, as derived through factor analysis using the PCA method, among breast cancer patients and their age-matched controls [15].

## Subjects and methods

### Study’s design and sample

This is a case–control study with face-to-face interviews with the participants. Between November 1, 2010, and July 31, 2012, 250 consecutive, newly (within 6 months) diagnosed breast cancer female patients (defined by physical examination and biopsy) that visited pathology–oncology clinics of five major General Hospitals in Athens, Greece (i.e., “Alexandra” General Hospital, “Elena Venizelos” Maternity-General Hospital, “Agioi Anargyroi” General Oncological Hospital of Kifissia, “Saint Savvas” Cancer Hospital, and “I. Metaxa” Special Cancer Hospital), were contacted to participate in the study. Patients with diagnosis older than 6 months (in order to avoid changes in their dietary habits or other behaviors) were not included. In the same period, 250 female subjects (controls) without any clinical symptoms, signs, or suspicious of any type of cancer in their medical history were selected on a volunteer basis. Control subjects were age-matched (±3 years) with the cancer patients, population-based, and selected from the same catchment area (i.e., Athens metropolitan area, i.e., 76 % or other areas) (i.e., controls were selected from the same city or town patients were living or working; there were no substantial differences between living and working areas of the participants). The participation rate of the patients was 82 % and of the controls was 88 %. To reduce selection bias, a random selection of the controls was performed, when it was possible (i.e., in 60 % of the controls), e.g., through the employees listings of the companies that were visited by the study’s investigators in order to enroll controls or the apartments of the building. The rest 40 % of the controls were selected on a feasibility basis and were colleagues, friends, or relatives of the study’s field investigators that fulfilled the aforementioned criteria.

The number of the enrolled subjects (_n_ = 500) was decided through power analysis in order to evaluate (two-sided) odds ratio (OR) equal to 1.10 (95 % CI 1.05, 1.15), achieving statistical power greater than 0.80 at 0.05 probability level (_p_ value).

The design of the study and the analytical methods followed have been already described elsewhere [15].

### Bioethics

The study has been approved by the Ethics Committee of “Alexandra” General Hospital (No. 4/10.3.2010), “I. Metaxa” Special Cancer Hospital (No. 40/8.12.2011), and “Saint Savvas” Cancer Hospital (No. 448/2.3.2012) and was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (1989) of the World Medical Association. Prior to the collection of any information, participants were informed about the aims and procedures of the study and provided their signed consent.

### Dietary assessment

A validated, semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) was used during the interviews to collect dietary information from the participants [15]. In brief, the FFQ included 86 questions regarding the frequency of consumption of all main food groups and beverages usually consumed. Specifically, data on regular consumption of each food group (i.e., never, rarely, 3–4 times/month, 1–2 times/week, 3–4 times/week, daily) were recorded for the last year prior to diagnosis. In this work, the interest was focused on food groups, such as the consumption of whole grains (i.e., whole grain bread, whole grain cereals, oatmeal, whole wheat pasta, brown, or wild rice), potatoes, fruits (apples, pears, bananas, peaches, plumps, grapes, melon, strawberries, cherries, oranges, or mandarins), greens (spinach, lettuce, fresh beans, etc.), vegetables (broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage, peppers, tomatoes, etc.), fish, red meat (including beef, lamb, veal, and pork) and its products (like sausages), poultry and white meat (including chicken, game, and turkey), dairy products (low, i.e., 0, 2 % or total fat) including milk, yoghurt, and cheese, alcoholic beverages, the use of olive oil in cooking, the use of margarine or butter in cooking or at the table, as well as the consumption of fried food and grilled meat or fish. Adherence to the Mediterranean dietary pattern was assessed using the MedDietScore, an 11-item composite dietary index, with large-scale scoring that ensures better predictive accuracy [11]. The range of the MedDietScore is between 0 and 55. Higher values of this score indicate greater adherence to the Mediterranean diet. The validation properties of the MedDietScore have been presented elsewhere in the literature [11, 16, 17].

### Other measurements

Age of the participants was recorded, as well as their place of living (i.e., living in the Metropolitan area of Athens or in other areas), educational level, and financial status (theoretical range 0–10, 0 represents the level of poverty, i.e., &lt;5,000 euro annual income from any source, and by 5,000 euro increase, 10 represents the highest financial status, i.e., &gt;55,000 annual income). Weight and height were measured using standardized procedures, and body mass index was calculated as weight in _kg_ divided by height in _m_-squared. Physical activity was assessed using the International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) index [18] that has been validated for the Greek population [19]. Subjects were asked to recall the number of days and hours or minutes they were engaged in physical activity of different intensities for at least 10 min, vigorous intensity and moderate intensity, walking, and time spent sitting. According to their physical activity levels, participants were classified as inactive, minimally active, or health enhancing physical activity (HEPA) active. Smoking habits (i.e., current and former smoking, total years of smoking, and number of cigarettes smoked per day) were also recorded. Family history of breast cancer, gynecological medical history (i.e., existence or not of menstruation, age of menarche, age of menopause, and use of hormone replacement therapy), as well as a detailed medical history regarding the common comorbidities and their treatment (i.e., hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes) were recorded during the interview.

### Statistical analysis

Continuous variables that were normally distributed were presented as mean ± SD. Normality was evaluated using the P–P plots. Categorical variables were presented as frequencies. Associations between categorical variables were tested by the calculation of chi-squared test. Student’s _t_ test for independent samples was used to evaluate mean differences of the normally distributed variables (i.e., body mass index, MedDietScore) between cases and controls, where in case of skewed continuous variables (i.e., IPAQ score), the tested hypothesis was evaluated using the nonparametric _U_ test suggested by Mann and Whitney.

To obtain food patterns, factor analysis with the principal components method (PCA) was applied to the dietary habits of the controls, in order to reflect the dietary exposure of the reference population of the case; factor loadings were then applied to the patients, as well [20]. The PCA (a commonly used method) explores individuals’ eating habits (usually assessed through food frequency questionnaires) and combines them together into non-correlated components based on the level of inter-correlation of their nutritional choices. At this point, it should be noted that the purpose of PCA was to derive a number of independent linear combinations (the components) of a set of foods or food groups that retain as much of the information of original dietary habits. In the present work, from the entire database of the 86 food variables, 14 foods, food groups, and beverages (i.e., whole grains, potatoes, fruits, vegetables, fish, red meat and its products, poultry and white meat, dairy products, alcoholic beverages, olive oil, margarine/butter, sausages, fried food, and grilled meat or fish) were finally used in the analysis, mainly due to their macronutrient composition and the fact that they have been previously associated with breast cancer. The food variables used had continuous distributions representing times per week the food item, group, or beverage were consumed. The correlation matrix of the food variables used showed that there were several correlation coefficients with absolute value &gt;0.4; moreover, the _phi_ coefficient (another measure of the inter-relationship of variables) was 0.78, i.e., close to 1 which implies high inter-relationships between food variables, and the Kaiser–Meier–Oklin criterion was 0.81 (also close to 1 which suggests very good inter-correlation). Therefore, the factor analysis would be effective for assessing meaningful food patterns. Normality of food variables was tested using the P–P plots; in the case of not-normally distributed variables, the log-transformation was used to achieve normality of the distribution. The orthogonal rotation (_rotated_ with _varimax_ option) was used to derive optimal non-correlated components (i.e., food patterns). The correlation matrix was used for the extraction of the components. The information was rotated in order to increase the representation of each food or food group to a component [20]. To decide the number of components to retain, the scree plot of the eigenvalues that derived from the correlation matrix of the standardized variables was first examined (eigenvalue is a value that indicates the proportion of the variance in consumption explained by each component). According to this criterion, the first three components should be retained. Moreover, according to the criterion proposed by Kaiser, i.e., the number of components that should be retained is equal to the number of eigenvalues that are greater than one, since these components explain more information than the individual food variables, it was also concluded that the first three components should be extracted here. Based on the principle that the component scores (loadings) are interpreted similarly to correlation coefficients [20]; thus, higher absolute values indicate that the food variable contributes most to the construction of the component and the food components (patterns) were named according to scores of the foods that were &gt;0.4.

Furthermore, conditional (by age) logistic regression analysis was applied to evaluate the odds of each dietary pattern among breast cancer patients and controls (models’ 1). The analysis also accounted for the potential confounding effect of the following characteristics: years of education (measured in years of school) as a proxy of social status, body mass index (in kg/m2), smoking ever (yes/no), physical activity (in MET-minutes/week), family history of breast cancer in order to encompass the genetic predisposition and potential lifestyle changes (yes/no), menopausal status (pre- vs. postmenopausal) because it has been strongly associated with breast cancer incidence (models’ 2), and place of living (Metropolitan area of Athens vs. other areas), a factor that may have influenced their lifestyle behaviors (including dietary), as well as their health status per se (models’ 3). Subgroup analysis by obesity, menopausal status, and place of living was applied since multi-adjusting cannot entirely exclude residual confounding. The subgroup analysis accounted for the same potential confounders mentioned above. The results are presented as ORs and their corresponding 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CI). All reported p values were based on two-sided tests. Statistical calculations were carried out using SPSS 18 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

## Results

### Characteristics of patients and controls

In Table 1, the basic characteristics of patients and controls are presented. Cases and controls were of similar age (according to the protocol of the study), while educational and financial status was lower in cases as compared to the controls (_p_ &lt; 0.001). Cases were more likely to be overweight and have at least one relative to breast cancer. There was no significant difference in smoking habits (_p_ = 0.21), as well as in menopausal status (_p_ = 0.49), while cases reported lower physical activity status (i.e., lower IPAQ score). Finally, regarding the overall quality of the diet, the level of adherence to the Mediterranean diet was moderate in both cases (i.e., 28/55) and controls (i.e., 30/55) (Table 1).




The MedDietScore is a measurement of adherence to the Mediterranean diet, with theoretical range 0–55; greater values reporting greater adherence to this pattern. The reported _p_ values were calculated using the _t_ test, the chi-square test, or the Mann–Whitney _U_ test

### Dietary patterns

As described above, based on the applied factor analysis, three first components that explained the 43 % of the total variation in consumption were studied here. The loadings for the three food components (patterns) that represent the correlation of each food item with the corresponding component are presented in Table 2 (in bold are the coefficients with absolute loadings &gt;0.4, which means that are better correlated with the component). Since the higher absolute values indicate that the food variable contributes more to the characterization of the component [ 20 ], it could be suggested that the extracted components are (a) an “unhealthy” food pattern (component 1), which loaded heavily on potatoes, red meat and its products, poultry and white meat, dairy products, use of margarine/butter in cooking or at the table, consumption of sausages, fried food as well as grilled meat or fish; (b) a “healthy/prudent” pattern that is mainly characterized by the consumption of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables; and (c) a pattern that represents the consumption of olive oil and fish. Component 1 was the most dominant food pattern and explained 21.5 % of the total variance. Each of the remaining 2 components explained from 8.2 % (component 3) to 13.6 % (component 2) of variance in consumption. Regarding the other 11 components that explained the rest of the variation in food and beverages consumption, none of them was characterized by a specific pattern in consumption. Moreover, component 1 was inversely correlated with MedDietScore (_r_ = −0.148, _p_ = 0.001), suggesting that women following the “unhealthy” pattern were not adherent to the Mediterranean diet, while component 2 and component 3 were positively correlated with the MedDietScore (_r_ = 0.701, _p_ &lt; 0.05; _r_ = 0.583, _p_ &lt; 0.05, respectively) suggesting that women following the “healthy” pattern as well as the pattern characterized by the consumption of olive oil and fish were also adherent to the Mediterranean diet.


Score coefficientsa (loadings) derived from factor (principal components) analysis regarding foods or food groups consumed by the study participants  


Description of the components: Component 1: potatoes, red meat and products, poultry and white meat, dairy products, margarine or butter in cooking or at the table, sausages, fried food, and grilled meat or fish; Component 2: whole grains, fruits, vegetables; and Component 3: olive oil, fish

aScore coefficients are similar to the correlation coefficients. Higher absolute values indicate that the food variable is correlated with the respective component

### Dietary patterns and breast cancer

Three nested, conditional logistic regression models were estimated in order to evaluate the association between each of the extracted dietary patterns and breast cancer (Table 3). The use of these models assisted in better exploring the potential effect of various confounders in the investigated relationship. Based on the first unadjusted models’ 1, it was observed that the odds of the food pattern that was mainly characterized by the consumption of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables (component 2) was favorable in controls than in the cases (OR 0.56, 95 % CI 0.46, 0.69), while the food pattern that represented the consumption of olive oil and fish (component 3) was also favorable in controls (OR 0.79, 95 % 0.65, 0.95). No significant association was observed as regards the “unhealthy” food pattern (component 1) (OR 1.14, 95 % CI 0.95, 1.38) (_p_ &gt; 0.05). In the second set of models, years of education (measured in years of school) as a proxy of social status, body mass index (in kg/m2), smoking ever (yes/no), physical activity (in MET-minutes/week), family history of breast cancer in order to encompass the genetic predisposition and potential lifestyle changes (yes/no), and menopausal status (pre- vs. postmenopausal) were accounted for. The “healthy/prudent” pattern (component 2) had still lower odds in breast cancer patients as compared to controls (OR 0.61, 95 % CI 0.48, 0.76), while the food pattern that represented the consumption of olive oil and fish (component 3) was also favorable in controls (OR 0.82, 95 % CI 0.67, 0.99). The “unhealthy” food pattern (component 1) was again not significantly associated with the outcome (OR 1.16, 95 % CI 0.94, 1.42). In the third nested model, place of living was additionally included. The beneficial effect of both the “healthy/prudent” as well as the food pattern that represented the consumption of olive oil and fish remained unaltered (OR 0.60, 95 % CI 0.47, 0.75 and OR 0.81, 95 % CI 0.66, 0.99) and of their place of living, while the “unhealthy” food pattern was again not significantly associated with the outcome (OR 1.15, 95 % CI 0.93, 1.41).


Results from conditional logistic regression models that were applied to evaluate the association between food components (dietary patterns) and the odds of having breast cancer in cases (_n_ = 250) and controls (_n_ = 250)  


All odds ratios and their corresponding 95 % CIs were calculated by performing conditional logistic regressions

Model 1 was not adjusted; model 2 was adjusted for the same variables included in model 1 plus years of education, family history of breast cancer, BMI, IPAQ score, smoking ever, and menopausal status; model 3 was adjusted for the same variables included in model 2 plus place of living

aSince the 1 unit increase in components’ scores is not meaningful (i.e., 1 unit increase does not mean 1 serving increase), the reader could only evaluate the direction of the effect size (i.e., odds ratio &gt;1 = “un-protective” or &lt;1 = “protective”)

### Profile analysis of the associations of dietary patterns and odds of breast cancer

However, multi-adjusting cannot entirely exclude residual confounding. Thus, subgroup analysis by obesity, menopausal status, and place of living was applied. The results were similar to the ones presented above; particularly, among normal weight women (i.e., BMI &lt; 25 kg/m2), the “healthy/prudent” pattern was favorably associated with absence of breast cancer (OR 0.62, 95 % CI 0.43, 0.90), and similarly among overweight women (i.e., 25 kg/m2 &lt; BMI &lt; 29.9 kg/m2) (OR 0.47, 95 % CI 0.31, 0.72), after adjusting for age, educational level, smoking ever, IPAQ score, family history of breast cancer, menopausal status, and place of living. However, among obese women (i.e., BMI &gt; 30 kg/m2), there was no significant association with the outcome (OR 0.70, 95 % CI 0.44, 1.11). Moreover, stratified analysis by menopausal status revealed similar relationships, since among premenopausal and postmenopausal women, the “healthy/prudent” food pattern was favorably associated with absence of the disease (OR 0.56, 95 % CI 0.39, 0.81 and OR 0.61, 95 % CI 0.44, 0.83, respectively), after the same adjustments were made. At this point, it should be noted that concerning only postmenopausal women, the “unhealthy” food pattern was associated with breast cancer (OR 1.36, 95 % CI 1.02, 1.81), after the same adjustments were made. Stratified analysis by place of living revealed that the “healthy/prudent” pattern was favorably associated with the absence of the disease in both Athens Metropolitan area inhabitants (OR 0.71, 95 % CI 0.55, 0.91) and among those participants who lived in other cities or towns outside the Metropolitan area of Athens (OR 0.26, 95 % CI 0.12, 0.55).

## Discussion

In this work, the relationship between a posteriori extracted dietary patterns adherence from the dietary reports of healthy women and breast cancer was studied. The analysis revealed that the patterns that were mainly characterized by the consumption of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables, as well as the consumption of olive oil and fish, were favorably associated with absence of breast cancer, while the pattern that was mainly characterized by the consumption of potatoes, red meat and its products, poultry and white meat, dairy products, use of margarine or butter in cooking or at the table, consumption of sausages, fried food, as well as grilled meat or fish was not significantly associated with the disease. The first two patterns were also positively correlated with an a priori defined dietary pattern, the Mediterranean diet, suggesting that the a posteriori dietary pattern approach is in accordance with the a priori approach (i.e., adherence to a predefined dietary prototype). However, using a posteriori techniques to identify participants’ eating behaviors has several advantages, since this method is inherently capable of overcoming methodological issues, such as the high levels of inter-correlation and the synergistic effect of foods, and it takes into account the complex way of how people eat as well as the possible combinations and interactions among foods and nutrients.

During the past years, dietary pattern analysis has emerged as a complementary approach of examining the relationship between diet and the risk of various chronic diseases [21]. Instead of looking at individual nutrients or foods, pattern analysis examines the effects of the overall diet and represents a broader picture of food and nutrient consumption. Furthermore, pattern analysis seems to capture problems that can be attributed to the limitations that traditional analyses have both in concept and design. For example, people’s diet choices include a variety of foods and other nutritional habits that may act synergistically or interactively on the risk of developing a disease. Moreover, the high level of inter-correlation between food variables makes the estimation of the effect size of single foods or nutrients in regression models problematic. On the other hand, pattern analysis reveals similarities and captures the extremes in food consumption. Moreover, as it has been suggested by Newby and Tucker, dietary patterns derived through multivariate statistical methods are a sound dietary assessment method and seem to be more predictive of disease risk than individual foods or nutrients [14]. As mentioned above, a posteriori analyses generate dietary patterns on empirically obtained information, and thus they do not necessarily create “healthy” patterns, while a priori approaches, using diet indexes, quantitatively measure the quality of dietary habits. However, the latter are limited on current knowledge about the relationships between diet and health.

Some other investigators have also evaluated dietary patterns in relation to breast cancer using similar multivariate techniques and describing similar food patterns like the “healthy/prudent” which tends to have high loadings of foods such as fruits, vegetables, poultry, fish, low-fat dairy, and whole grains [22]. For example, in a recent case–control study conducted among 2,884 cases and 5,509 controls, Buck et al. [23] using principal component analysis identified two major dietary patterns using dietary data collected through a 176-item FFQ. The first pattern that was labeled the “healthy” one was characterized by high vegetable and vegetable oil consumption, while the second was labeled as the “unhealthy” and was characterized by high meat and deep-frying fat consumption. However, overall, no associations between these patterns and breast cancer risk were observed. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [24] used a validated FFQ to assess dietary intake in 438 cases with histologically confirmed primary breast cancer and 438 controls. After using principal component analysis, two dietary patterns were identified: vegetable–fruit–soy–milk–poultry–fish and refined grain–meat–pickle pattern. When the analysis was adjusted for confounders, a 74 % decreased risk was observed among women in the highest quartile of the vegetable–fruit–soy–milk–poultry–fish dietary pattern relative to the lowest quartile (OR 0.26, 95 % CI 0.17–0.42). Moreover, when Hirose et al. [25] conducted a case–control study using data from the hospital-based epidemiological research program at Aichi Cancer Center (HERPACC), principal component analysis was used to derive food patterns based on 31 food variables. From the four major dietary patterns that were extracted, the first one was labeled as “prudent” and was characterized by the consumption of vegetables, fruit, soybean curd, fish, and milk and lower consumption of fatty and salty foods. After adjusting for potential confounders, an inverse association was evident for the above pattern. More recently, in the California Teachers Study Cohort, data from 91,779 women were analyzed and five predominant dietary patterns were identified using principal component analysis. The first one that was labeled as the “plant-based” and was characterized by high consumption of fruits and vegetables was associated with a reduction in breast cancer risk (relative risk: 0.85; 95 % CI 0.76, 0.95 for the highest compared with the lowest consumption quintile; _p_ trend = 0.003) [26]. Similarly, Baglietto et al. [27] after using data from the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study which included 20,967 women applied principal component analysis to 124 foods and identified four dietary factors. Between them, only that characterized by high consumption of fruit and salads was associated with a reduced risk, with stronger associations observed for tumors not expressing estrogen (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR).

Regarding the derived food patterns that were extracted, it was observed that the patterns that were mainly characterized by the consumption of fruits and vegetables as well as olive oil were associated with lower likelihood of breast cancer. Fruits and vegetables contain a wide range of constituents which may have cancer-preventing effects including antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin C and vitamin E, folate, dietary fiber, dithiolthiones, glucosinolates, indoles, isothiocyanates, protease inhibitors, and phytochemicals (lycopene, phenolic compounds, flavonoids) [28, 29]. Moreover, they contain a large amount of dietary fiber, for which mechanistic data support the plausibility of a protective effect on breast carcinogenesis, especially for vegetable fiber, due to their combination of soluble and insoluble fibers in equal proportions [30]. Concerning olive oil, animal and human studies have associated its consumption with lower incidence and mortality rates from some cancers including that of the breast. According to the studies, it can influence the stages of the carcinogenesis process as well as the immune system, the oxidative stress, alter the hormonal status, modify the structure and function of cell membranes, and modulate cell signaling transduction pathways and regulation of gene expression. Its probable chemoprotective effect can be attributed to its particular fatty acid composition: It contains a high amount of oleic acid (OA), a suitable amount of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), a relatively low n-6 PUFA/n-3 PUFA ratio, as well as minor bioactive compounds such as squalene and phenolic antioxidants [31].

## Limitations

The major limitation of this study was, as in all case–control studies, the recall bias. However, an effort was given to minimize this limitation by choosing newly diagnosed consecutive patients and collecting all subjects in a small period of time. Regarding the selection of the controls, the “healthy” volunteer effect may exist. Moreover, selection bias may also exists, but as mentioned in the Methods section, an effort was given to reduce it by performing, when possible, random selection of the controls, enrolling controls based on their willingness to participate and not on any of the exposure factors’ distribution that would substantially alter the results (only age matching was performed), using the same catchment area as the patients, and avoiding any “specific” sampling rule in the allocation of the participants. All these procedures were applied to ensure that the control group reflected the distribution of the exposure characteristics of the referent population of the cases. Moreover, people who collected the data were commonly well trained before the beginning of the study, limiting the intra-investigators bias. The effect size measures used in case–control studies (i.e., the ORs) tend to overestimate the actual effect of the cause on effect usually observed in prospective studies; thus, the findings should be interpreted with caution.

## Conclusions

Dietary pattern analysis revealed behaviors in participants’ consumption that could not be assessed with any other method. It was found that a dietary behavior that was mainly characterized by the consumption of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables, as well as a dietary behavior characterized by the consumption of olive oil and fish, favorably (i.e., protectively) “affected” the odds of having breast cancer. Beyond the important nutritional message these findings carry on, they deserve further attention from a methodological point-of-view because the a posteriori dietary pattern assessment approach that was followed here reflects the “true” habits of the participants and not the level of adherence to an a priori defined dietary model.

### Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank all the participants of the study because without their contribution this project would never been done and also would like to thank the Directors of the clinics of the involved hospitals: Gerasimos Aravantinos, Epaminondas Samantas, Evangelos Filopoulos, and the field investigators of the study: Aikaterini Manousou, Vassiliki Markasioti, Aikaterini Kakou, Fotini-Maria Mpalli, Nikolaos Soupos, Zoe Tsakalou, Maria Mitsou, Artemisia Tsakla, Iro Karapapa, Maria Somaraki, Athanasios Tektonidis, Athanasia Laina, and Aggeliki Siolavou.

### Conflict of interest

On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.
