# Anticancer effects of bioactive berry compounds

## Abstract

In the present review, we describe chemical and chemopreventive properties as well as health benefits of both extracts and bioactive compounds from various types of berries including small soft-fleshed edible berries and from berry-like fruits such as strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, blueberries, mulberries, currants, gooseberries, elderberries, açai berries, and pomegranates. In particular, we describe how berry-derided phytochemicals, including anthocyanidins, proanthocyanidins, flavonols, flavanols, stilbenoids, terpenoids, ellagitannins, and ellagic acid target oxidative and UV radiation stress-induced DNA damage, _Helicobacter pilori_ infection, pro-inflammatory as well as the major cancer hallmarks. 

### Keywords


### Abbreviations

































































## Introduction

Berries have been consumed since the Neolithic age, with particularly high consumption rates in Scandinavian and South American countries over the last centuries (Duthie 2007a; Stoner et al. 2008). Berries are often used as medicinal food, and the applications of berries as chemopreventive anti-inflammatory or anti-cancer agents, as anti-inflammatory remedies, as cancer treatment adjuvants, or as cosmetics have been the subject of a large number of patents and clinical trials (Adhami et al. 2009; Akerreta et al. 2007; Amin et al. 2009; Boivin et al. 2007; Cravotto et al. 2010; Darshan and Doreswamy 2004; Garbacki et al. 2004; Guarrera 2005; Häkkinen et al. 1999; Heber 2008; Heinonen 2007; Ivanova et al. 2005; Kresty et al. 2006; Lee et al. 2010; McDougall et al. 2008; Siddiqui et al. 2008; Stoner 2009; Stoner et al. 2008; Tunón et al. 1995; Wang and Stoner 2008). The widely accepted healthy virtues of berries, which comprise anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, fever-suppressing, pain-killing, detoxifying, anti-diabetic, anti-aging, and anti-cancer properties, are due to the fruits’ richness in phytochemicals and in micronutrients such as vitamins A, B9, C, and E, calcium, magnesium, potassium, iron, zinc, and selenium (Bagchi et al. 2004; Beattie et al. 2005; Heinonen 2007; Ivanova et al. 2005; Juranic and Zizak 2005; Kresty et al. 2006; Seeram 2008). Scientists have been aware of the close connection between inflammation and cancer since the middle of the nineteenth century (Balkwill and Mantovani 2001; Grivennikov et al. 2010), and it is now widely accepted that inflammation is a critical component of tumor progression (Aggarwal et al. 2009; Grivennikov et al. 2010). Here, we describe the chemical properties and anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer bioactivities of the major compounds found in small soft-fleshed edible berries and in berry-like fruits, and we explain why the regular consumption of berries is beneficial to our health, especially in the context of inflammation and cancer.

## Bioactivities of whole berries (including juices, berry extracts, and freeze-dried powders)

The most commonly consumed small soft-fleshed berries and berry-like fruits include strawberries (_Fragaria vesca, Fragara virginiana_), red raspberries (_Rubus chingii_), black raspberries (_Rubus occidentalis_), blackberries (_Rubus fruticosus_), mulberries (_Morus_ sp.), blueberries (_Vaccinium corymbosum_), cranberries (_Vaccinium macrocarpon_), black currants (_Ribes nigrum_), red currants (_Ribes rubum_), gooseberries (_Ribes grossularia_), pomegranate (_Punica granatum_), elderberries (_Sambucus nigra_), grapes (_Vitis_ sp.), and açai berries (_Euterpe oleracea_) (Beattie et al. 2005). Less commonly consumed edible berries with bioactive properties include honeysuckle (_Lonicera caerulea_), persimmons (_Diospyros_ sp.), Indian gooseberries (_Phyllanthus embilica_), and goji berries (_Lycium barbarum_). Botanical berries which are not considered as berries in common parlance, such as tomatoes, chilli peppers, kiwi, starfruit, and sapote are not dealt with in the present paper. Powdered extracts and freshly prepared berry drinks are widely available on the market, and are often described as “superfoods” (Bagchi et al. 2004; Heinonen 2007). Moreover recent reporst describe new isotonic blends with lemon and anthocyanins-rich berries with higher antioxidant and biological effects (Girones-Vilaplana et al. 2013). The consumption of berries, whether as fresh fruits, as powdered formula, or in drinks, has been associated with a large number of health benefits, ranging from anti-bacterial and anti-viral effects to the protection against inflammation, cancer, and hearth diseases (Basu and Penugonda 2009; Basu et al. 2010; Beattie et al. 2005; Duthie 2007a; Underwood 2002). Clinical trials have shown that the consumption of pomegranate juice, for instance, can significantly delay the reoccurrence and metastsis of prostate cancer following radical surgery or radiation therapy (Pantuck et al. 2006). In the context of inflammation and cancer, berry components are known to act as chemopreventive agents targeting oxidation, UV radiation, and resulting DNA damage (Abuja et al. 1998; Bagchi et al. 2004; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Beattie et al. 2005; Beekwilder et al. 2005; Borges et al. 2010; Duthie 2007b; Henning et al. 2010; Jensen et al. 2008; Li et al. 2008; Ross et al. 2007; Seeram 2008; Stoner 2009; Stoner et al. 2008, 2010; Wang et al. 2005; Wyzgoski et al. 2010), bacterial infection (Neto 2007a), pro-inflammatory and carcinogenic cell signaling cascades (Afaq et al. 2005; Amin et al. 2009; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Jurenka 2008; Lee et al. 2010), cancer cell growth and proliferation (Beattie et al. 2005; Beekwilder et al. 2005; Khan et al. 2007; Malik et al. 2005; McDougall et al. 2008; Neto 2007b; Ross et al. 2007; Seeram 2008; Wang et al. 2005; Zhang et al. 2008), cellular immortality (Beattie et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2006; Hogan et al. 2010; Khan et al. 2010; Malik et al. 2005; Neto 2007a; Schauss et al. 2006; Schreckinger et al. 2010; Seeram 2008; Seeram et al. 2006; Stoner et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009), angiogenesis and metastasis (Adams et al. 2010; Ahmed et al. 2005; Atalay et al. 2003; Chen et al. 2006; Duthie 2007a; Khan et al. 2007; Lu et al. 2006; Neto 2007a; Seeram 2008; Toi et al. 2003; Zikri et al. 2009), and the erythropoietic differentiation of leukaemia cells (Afaq et al. 2005; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Kawaii and Lansky 2004) (Fig. 1). 



## Molecular targets of berry-derived anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer compounds

### Oxidative stress and UV radiation

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation and reactive oxygen species (ROS), which include superoxide radicals (O·−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl radicals (OH−), and singlet oxygen (‘O2), plays a critical role in the initiation and in the development of a very wide range of diseases. Oxidative stress and UV radiation can cause cellular damage by oxidizing DNA or proteins, or by causing lipid peroxidation (Bagchi et al. 2004; Borges et al. 2010). DNA damage can lead to mutations and to cancer, and protein oxidation can lead to protein degradation, protein denaturation, and loss off enzymatic activity. Inflamed cells are known to release ROS, and many transcription factors implicated in carcinogenesis and in inflammation are redox-sensitive. For these reasons, oxidation and UV radiation stress are important targets for anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer compounds (Bagchi et al. 2004; Borges et al. 2010). Most importantly, anti-oxidants and sunscreens can reduce the risk of tumor formation before it becomes a serious health issue. Berries are particularly rich in anti-oxidants, and chemopreventive pilot studies have shown that a long-term consumption of berries significantly increases the anti-oxidant status of blood serum (Jensen et al. 2008; Seeram 2008; Stoner 2009; Stoner et al. 2010). The anti-oxidant potential of berries and of other fruits is often expressed as oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC). While anti-oxidant molecules in food have a wide range of functionswhich are not necessarily related to the ability to absorb free radicals, ORAC values, which are listed in Table 1, are a good indicator of the anti-oxidant potential of berries in comparison with other fruits and vegetables (USDA 2010). Recently Chen et al. (2013) underlined the great potential to improve human health through consumption of colored berries, especially those high in antioxidant capacity.


Oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) of berries and other fruits (adapted from (USDA 2010))  


###  _Helicobacter pylori_ infection

Beside UV radiation and oxidative stress, bacterial and viral infections are known to be a major factor contributing to chronic inflammation and to cancer. As a matter of fact, parasitic viri and bacteria have been shown to be capable of using the NF-κB (nuclear factor-κB) pathway, which is common to inflammation and cancer development, to secure their survival in their host organisms (Hiscott et al. 2001). _Helicobacter pilori_ is notorious for its implications in chronic gastritis, which can progress towards intestinal metaplasis (Adhami et al. 2009; Senthilkumar et al. 2010; Shanks and El-Omar 2009). Cranberry, raspberry, and strawberry extracts are capable of preventing the adhesion of _H. pylori_ to the gastric mucosa cells (Neto 2007a; Neto et al. 2008; Nohynek et al. 2006). In addition to cranberry, raspberry, and strawberry extracts, black currant, blueberry, pomegranate, and grape extracts have been shown to prevent gastrointestinal cell infection by pathogenic Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, without having any adverse effect on the beneficial gut microflora (Bialonska et al. 2010; Puupponen-Pimiä et al. 2001). The infection by Gram-negative bacteria such as _Vibrio cholera_, _Shigella dysenteriae_, _Campylobacter_ spp., and _Salmonella enterica_ is achieved through an interference with the latter’s binding to the intestinal mucosa cells (Puupponen-Pimiä et al. 2001).

### Inflammatory and carcinogenic cell signaling cascades

Oxidative stress, UV radiation, and microbial infection, together with other inflammatory or carcinogenic stimuli such as injuries or extra-cellular cytokine, all culminate upstream of a series of cell signaling cascades leading to inflammation, cancer cell immortality, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Signaling cascades targeted by berry-derived compounds include the PI-3K (phosphoinositide-3 kinase)/Akt pathway, the Ras/MAPK (mitogen activated protein kinase) pathways, the NF-κB activation pathway, and the JAK (Janus kinase)/STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway.

#### The PI-3K/Akt pathway

The PI-3K/Akt pathway promotes cellular immortality by allowing damaged cells to overcome checkpoints in the cell cycle, and by preventing apoptosis. Once activated by survival factors, PI-3 K phosphorylates phosphatidylinostol (3,4)-bisphosphate (PIP2) to form phosphatidylinostol (3,4,5)-triphosphate (PIP3), which binds to Akt. Once bound to PIP3, Akt is phosphorylated to its active form by phosphoinositide dependent kinase 1 or by the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). Activated Akt leads, in some circumstances, to the trespassing of the G1/S and G2/M checkpoints by damaged cells. The PI-3K/Akt pathway also leads to the activation of the NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways, and it down-regulates the pro-apoptotic protein BAD (Bcl-2-associated death promoter (Kandel et al. 2002; Ramaswamy et al. 1999; Song et al. 2005).

Black raspberries, blackberries, and blueberries have been shown to inhibit the PI-3K/Akt pathway and the downstream MAPK and NF-κB pathways (Adams et al. 2010; Lu et al. 2006).

#### The Ras/MAPK pathways

Ras/MAPK pathways are initiated by the activation of epidermal growth factors (EGFs) through various stress stimuli including UV radiation, bacterial or viral infections, and cytokines. Activated EGFs bind to EGF receptors on the cellular membrane to induce a kinase cascade that culminates in the phoshorylation and activation of MAPKs such as ERKs (extracellular signal-regulated kinases) ERK1 (MAPK1) and ERK2 (MAPK2), JNKs (c-Jun N-terminal kinases) MAPK8, MAPK9, and MAPK10, and p38 MAPKs MAPK11, MAPK12, MAPK13, and MAPK14. ERKs are involved in the activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP-1) and promotion of cell division, while JNKs and p38 MAPKs are involved in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), in apoptosis, and in cell differentiation (Kim et al. 2004, 2005, 2009; Shin et al. 2007).

Strawberry extracts, which have been shown to prevent the growth and proliferation of colon, prostate, and breast cancer cells, inhibit TPA (tetradecnoylphorbol-13-acetate) or UVB induced phosphorylation of ERKs 1 and 2 and of various JNKs (Wang et al. 2005; Zhang et al. 2008). Pomegranate extracts inhibit the Ras/MAPK pathway by interfering with the phosphorylation of JNK and p38 (Afaq et al. 2005; Ahmed et al. 2005; Amin et al. 2009; Khan et al. 2007; Malik et al. 2005). The inhibition of JNK and p38 MAPK activation is responsible for the rather unique property possessed by pomegranate extracts of inducing erythroid differentiation in leukaemia cells (Afaq et al. 2005; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Kawaii and Lansky 2004). Black raspberry, blackberry, and blueberry extracts inhibit the activation of ERKs, JNKs, and p38 MAPKs (Adams et al. 2010; Bae et al. 2009; Duthie 2007a; Huang et al. 2007; Li et al. 2008; Lu et al. 2006; Seeram 2008).

#### The NF-κB activation pathway

Upon stimulation by cytokines, UV radiation, or oxidative stress, the IκB (inhibitor of NF-κB) kinase IKK (kinase of IκB) phosphorylates IκB. Once phosphorylated, IκB is targeted for degradation by the 26S proteasome, and the free, activated transcription factor NF-κB is able to translocate into the nucleus and to induce the transcription of specific genes, many of which are genes responsible for inflammation, cell proliferation, or cell growth (Fig. 3). Pro-inflammatory genes and carcinogenes transcribed by NF-κB include IL-1β, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and cyclin D1. IL-1β and IL-6 induce the expression of cycloxygenase 2 (COX-2) and of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), leading to the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and of nitric oxide (NO), respectively. COX-2 is involved in many inflammatory processes and induces various carcinomas, and a constitutive overexpression of COX-2 causes a high level of resistance to apoptosis, as COX-2 promotes the stabilization of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin (Baud and Karin 2001; Cohen 2009; Folmer et al. 2008; Hou et al. 2005; Hsu et al. 2010; Krysan et al. 2004).

Blackberry, black raspberry, blueberry, cranberry, grape, raspberry, elderberry, pomegranate, strawberry, and black raspberry extracts have been shown to inhibit NF-κB activation (Aggarwal and Shishodia 2006; Bae et al. 2009; Bagchi et al. 2004; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Boivin et al. 2007; Chen et al. 2006; Duthie 2007a; Gupta et al. 2010; Khan et al. 2007; Lu et al. 2006; Seeram 2008; Stoner et al. 2008; Toi et al. 2003; Wang et al. 2005; Zhang et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009). The inhibition of NF-κB by plack raspberries results from the phosphorylation of IκB-α and from the inhibition of the PI-K/Akt pathway (Lu et al. 2006). Most berry extracts, and açai berry extracts in particular, inhibit lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NF-κB activation and the subsequent production of COX-2 and of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins (Afaq et al. 2005; Ahmed et al. 2005; Amin et al. 2009; Bagchi et al. 2004; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Chen et al. 2006; Duthie 2007a; Hafeez et al. 2008; Hogan et al. 2010; Khan et al. 2007; Lu et al. 2006; Lyall et al. 2009; Malik et al. 2005; Schauss et al. 2006; Schreckinger et al. 2010; Seeram 2008; Stoner et al. 2008; Toi et al. 2003; Zikri et al. 2009). The inhibition of the transcriptional activity of NF-κB by cranberry extracts has been shown to lead to the inhibition of COX-2 gene expression and to a decrease in the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α (Neto 2007a; Neto et al. 2008).

#### The JAK/STAT pathway

The JAK/STAT pathway is activated by the binding of growth factors and cytokines to the JAK receptor on the cellular membrane, resulting in a multimerization and trans-phosphorylation of the receptor and two JAK molecules, and in the activation of the JAKs. In turn, the activated JAKs phosphorylate STATs and other target molecules. Phosphorylated STATs enter the nucleus where they regulate the transcription of target genes. A dysregulation of STATs causes aberrant cell growth and angiogenesis and prevents apoptotis (Rawlings et al. 2004).

Black currant and blueberry extracts have been shown to inhibit the phosphorylation of STATs (Bae et al. 2009; Borges et al. 2010; Hurst et al. 2010).

### Cancer cell proliferation and immortality through the trespassing of cell cycle checkpoints

Cell cycle checkpoints help ensure the accuracy of DNA replication and division. Checkpoints occur late in G1 to prevent faulty DNA from being duplicated in the S phase of the cell cycle, and late in G2, which prevents damaged cells from entering into mitosis. The checkpoints are regulated by cyclin dependent kinases (cdks) which, in turn, are controlled by cyclins (DiPaola 2002). Cyclins bind to cdks to form activated kinases that induce the progression into the next stage of the cell cycle. The G1/S cell cycle checkpoint is controlled by the cdk4/6-cyclin D complex and by the cdk2-cyclin E complex. cdk4/6 and cdk2 permit the passage into the S phase by phosphorylating the cell-cycle inhibitor retinoblastoma protein (Rb). The phosphorylation of Rb reduces its affinity for the transcription factor E2F which is required for the entry into the S phase. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) causes synthesis of p15 and p21 which block the activity of cdk 2, 4, and 6. In cancer, cells proliferate aberrantly as mutated TGF-β no longer controls the G1/S checkpoint properly. The tumor suppressor protein p53, which normally stimulates the transcription of genes that inhibit cdk4/6 and cdk2 in response to DNA damage, is also often mutated in cancer cells (Creasey et al. 1980; DiPaola 2002). The G2/M checkpoint is regulated by the cdk1-cyclin B complex. During G2, cdk1 is maintained inactive by the kinases Wee1 and Mt1. Once the G2/M checks have been successfully completed, the phosphatase Cdc25 activates cdk1 and thereby induces the progression into mitosis (Fig. 3). Defects in p53 or in endogenous cdk inhibitors such as p21 prevent the cell cycle arrests required for repairs to damaged DNA (Seeram 2008; Shu et al. 1997). One of the functions of the anti-cancer drug paclitaxel is to activate the cdk1-cyclin B1 complex (Deep et al. 2006; Shu et al. 1997).

Blackberry, black raspberry, blueberry, cranberry, grape, raspberry, and strawberry extracts inhibit the growth of breast, cervical, colon, and prostate cancer cell-lines. The extracts induce cell cycle arrest at the G1/S checkpoint by down-regulating the expression of cyclin kinases cdk2, cdk4, and cdk6 and of cyclin D (Aggarwal and Shishodia 2006; Chen et al. 2006; McDougall et al. 2008; Meeran and Katiyar 2008; Neto 2007a; Seeram 2008; Stoner et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009). Pomegranate extracts arrest human lung carcinoma cells at the G1/S checkpoint by downregulating the expression of cyclin-dependent kinases cdk2, cdk4, and cdk6 and of cyclins D and E (Khan et al. 2007; Malik et al. 2005).

### Cellular immortality through the repression of apoptosis

Apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death, is a critical mechanism by which damaged, infected, or excessive cells are removed from the cell pool. Failure to initiate apoptosis when needed is a hallmark for cancer development (Folmer et al. 2009; Greenhough et al. 2009). Apoptosis can be activated by an extrinsic pathway involving the binding of extra-cellular death receptor ligands to their corresponding receptors on the cell membrane or by a mitochondria-mediated intrinsic pathway (Folmer et al. 2009). The major death receptors involved in the extrinsic apoptotic pathway include the Fas receptor and the TNF-α-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor. The binding of the extra-cellular ligands to the death receptors induces a pathway culminating in the activation of the cystein protease caspase 3. The activation of caspase 3 is also the ultimate outcome of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway as a result of an imbalance between mitochondrial pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins such as Bax, Bak, Bad, and Bid and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL in favor of the pro-apoptotic proteins. Caspase 3 activates the endonuclease which leads to chromatin condensation and packages the cellular components into apoptosomes for degradation by neighboring cells. Viral infections can interfere with the extrinsic Fas-ligand dependent apoptotic pathway or inhibit the pro-apoptotic proteins p53, Bax, and Bad. Carcinogens can induce mutations in the pro-apoptotic protein p53 or upset the balance between Bcl-2 proteins in favor of the anti-apoptotic proteins (Folmer et al. 2009).

Blackberries, raspberries, black raspberries, blueberries, grapes, strawberries, and cranberries have the strongest pro-apoptotic potential amongst berry-derived products (Beattie et al. 2005; Gupta et al. 2010; Seeram et al. 2006). Açai berries have also been reported as inducers of apoptosis in cancer cells (Hogan et al. 2010; Schauss et al. 2006; Schreckinger et al. 2010). A major mechanism of action of berry-derived apoptosis promoters involves the activation of Bax (Chen et al. 2006; Seeram 2008; Stoner et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009). Pomegranate induces apoptosis by inducing the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Bak, and by down-regulating the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL (Chen et al. 2006; Khan et al. 2010; Malik et al. 2005; Seeram 2008; Stoner et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009).

### Angiogenesis and metastasis

When tumours start to invade the surrounding tissue and to metastasize throughout the body, they become cancerous and malignant (Folkman 1996; Ruoslahti 1996). Cancerous cells use very aggressive strategies to trespass into the blood steam and into the various types of tissues. Once cancer cells have detached themselves from their primary site, they release vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) which dissolve the extracellular matrix and basement membranes that separate the cancer cells from blood vessels and timulate the growth of new blood vessels to be used by the cancer cells for spreading through the body (Folkman 1996; Ruoslahti 1996; Weinberg 1996). MMP-2 and MMP-9 are thought to play a critical role in metastasis, while MMP-1 is thought to play an important role in rheumatoid andosteoarthritis. MMPs are normally inhibited by specific endogenous tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Tissue invasion and metastasis are the major culprits in cancer lethality (Folkman 1996; Ruoslahti 1996). Malignant spreading of cancer cells leads to the physical and functional disruption of vital tissues and organs, and metastasis to numerous distant locations throughout the body makes the treatment of the disease notoriously difficult (Folkman 1996; Ruoslahti 1996; Smyrniotopoulos et al. 2010). In vitro and animal studies have shown that berry extracts prevent angiogenesis by inhibiting the expression of VEGF (Chen et al. 2006; Zikri et al. 2009). The strongest berry-related anti-angiogenic activities have been found in raspberry, blueberry, and cranberry juices (Seeram 2008). Black raspberries extracts inhibit angiogenesis by targeting VEGF (Chen et al. 2006; Zikri et al. 2009). Cranberry extracts are known to inhibit the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9, and to increase the expression of TIMPs in prostate cancer cells (Neto 2007a). Blueberries extracts down-regulate VEGF and matrix metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, and they increase the secretion of the endogenous MMP inhibitor TIMP-1 (Adams et al. 2010; Atalay et al. 2003; Lu et al. 2006). Pomegranate extracts inhibit the expression of VEGF and of MMP-1, MMP-3, and MMP-13 (Ahmed et al. 2005; Khan et al. 2007; Park et al. 2010; Toi et al. 2003). Grape extracts inhibit MMP-2 and MMP-9 (Gupta et al. 2010).

## The chemical composition of berries

Numerous studies have been undertaken over the years to characterize the chemical composition of edible berries, and to investigate the bioactivities of the isolated compounds. The major compounds responsible for the health-beneficial properties of edible berries are phytochemicals, including phenolics (flavonoids, phenolic acids, ellagitannins, and stilbenes), terpenoids, and micronutrients such as vitamin A, B, C, selenium, zinc, and folic acid (Beattie et al. 2005). The chemical composition of each type of common edible berry is given in Table 2, and the bioactivities of the different compounds are summarized in Table 3. The chemical structures of berry-derived phytochemicals are shown in Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5.




Source data: Moyer et al. (2002), Bagchi et al. (2004), Seeram et al. (2006), Jing et al. (2008), Stoner et al. (2008), Seeram (2008), Basu and Penugonda (2009), Stoner (2009), Basu et al. (2010), Borges et al. (2010), Del Rio et al. (2010)


Sources and bioactivities of anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory berry metabolites  










## Phenolics

Phenolics found in edible berries include flavonoids (flavonols, flavones, flavanols, anthocyanins, and proanthocyanidins), ellagitannins, phenolic acids (hydroxybenzoic acids and hydroxycinnamic acids), and stilbenoids. Berry phenolics are best known for their ability to act as anti-oxidants, but the biological activities exerted by berry phenolics extend beyond anti-oxidation. They exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, induce carcinogen detoxification enzymes, and modulate signaling pathways of cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis (Duthie 2007a; Ehala et al. 2005; Seeram 2008).

### Flavonoids

#### Flavonols and flavones

Flavonols are the most widespread flavonoids in fruits and vegetables. Like most flavonoids, flavonols generally exist as glycosides in nature. The most common aglycon units of flavonols are quercetin 1, myricetin 2, or kaempferol 3. In addition to these, the flavonol fisetin 4 is found in strawberries, and the flavone luteolin 5 is found in pomegranates and in Açai berries (Kang et al. 2010; Neto 2007a). The sugar moieties of glycosylated flavonols include galactose, arabinose, and rhamnose (Kang et al. 2010; Neto 2007a). Flavonols have good anti-oxidant potentials. The radical scavenging activity of flavonols is influenced by the number and location of hydroxyl groups, of sugar moieties, and of other substitutions. The required structural criteria for high radical scavenging activity of flavonoids included the presence of an ortho-dihydroxy groups (catechol structure) in the B-ring. Quercetin 1, which is the most common flavonol in black raspberries, strawberries, black currants, red currants, and gooseberries, is known to act as an anti-inflammatory agent by inhibiting the expression of COX-2 and of IL-12 (Beattie et al. 2005; Häkkinen et al. 1999; Rao et al. 2005). The inhibition of IL-12 expression is achieved through the blockage of the JAK/STAT signaling cascade by quercetin 1 (Rao et al. 2007). Quercetin 1 also induces apoptosis in leukaemia cells by inhibiting the activation of NF-κB, by decreasing the expression of the pro-survival protein Ras, and by increasing the levels of expression of the pro-apoptotic protein p53. Quercetin 1 interferes with the Ras/MAPK pathway by targeting the protein kinases Raf1 and MAP2K1 directly, without competing with ATP (Lee et al. 2008; Wang and Stoner 2008). The hydroxyl group at the 3′ position in the C ring is critical for the binding to MAP2K1, which is why kaempferol 3 and the stilbenoid resveratrol 6, which are structurally related to quercetin 1 but lack a hydroxyl group at the 3′ position, cannot inhibit MAP2K1 effectively (Lee et al. 2008). Quercetin 1 has also been shown to interfere with the PI-3K/Akt signaling pathway, an to inhibit the growth of colon adenocarcinoma, of breast adenocarcinoma, and the progression of leukaemia by arresting the cell cycle at the G1/S checkpoint by inhibiting cdk2 (Beattie et al. 2005; Neto 2007a; Rao et al. 2007; Stoner et al. 2008), and by inducing apoptosis through the up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic proteins p21, Bak, Bax, cytochrome c, and caspase 3, and through a down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (Wang and Stoner 2008). The richest sources of quercetin 1 are blueberries, black currants, cranberries, and lingonberries (Häkkinen et al. 1999; Neto 2007a). Along with quercetin 1, myricetin 2 and kaempferol 3 are very abundant in cranberries and in black currants (Neto 2007a). Myricetin 2 is an anti-oxidant, and it interferes with the Ras/MAPK signaling cascades, thereby inhibiting the activation of NF-κB and AP-1 and the subsequent up-regulation of VEGF and of MMP-9 (Kim et al. 2009). Myricetin 2 inhibits the kinase activity of MAP2K1 and MAP2K4 by binding directly to the kinases. The binding of myricetin 2 to the kinase is in competition with ATP, as myricetin 2 docks into the ATP binding pocket of MAP2K4 (Kim et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2007). Kaempferol 3 inhibits the ERK, JNK, p38 MAPK pathways and the subsequent activation of NF-κB and AP-1 (Jung et al. 2010; Lim and Kim 2007; Park et al. 2010). Kaempferol 3 is also known to act as an anti-photoaging agent by inhibiting UV-induced COX-2 and MMP-1 expression (Jung et al. 2010; Lim and Kim 2007; Park et al. 2010). Fistein 4, which is found in strawberries and in grapes, has anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-angiogenic properties (Khan et al. 2010). Fisetin 4 also induces apoptosis by modulating the expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2-family proteins, and by up-regulating the pro-apoptotic caspases 3, 8, and 9. Fistein 4 targets primarily the PI-3K/Akt signaling pathway (Khan et al. 2010).

The flavone aglycon unit luteolin 5, which is a major constituent of pomegranate and açai berries, is a potent anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer agent (Amin et al. 2009). Luteolin 5 has been shown to target the PI-3K/Akt and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways (Amin et al. 2009). Luteolin 5 arrests cancer cells at the G1/S and G2/S checkpoints, and it induces apoptosis by down-regulating Bcl-2 and by up-regulating p53, Bax, and Bak (Amin et al. 2009). Other aglycone flavones with potent anti-oxidant properties that are commonly found in açai berries include chrysoeriol 7 and dihydrokaempferol 8 (Kang et al. 2010; Schreckinger et al. 2010).

Conjugation to the sugar moiety occurs most frequently at position 3 of the flavonoid’s C ring (Crozier et al. 2009; Neto 2007a). Glycosylated flavonols and flavones commonly found in berries include rutin 9, tiliroside 10, orientin 11, and homoorientin 12 (Borges et al. 2010; Rao et al. 2005; Wu et al. 2007). The rutinose (6-_O_-α-L-rhamnosyl-d-glucose) glycoside of quercetin, rutin 9, which is particularly abundant in black currants and in lingonberries, possesses strong anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties (Borges et al. 2010; Kang et al. 2010; Schreckinger et al. 2010; Wu et al. 2007). The kaempferol glycoside tiliroside 10, which is found in Açai berries, reduces the production of NO, TNF-α, and IL-12 in LPS stimulated macrophages (Kang et al. 2010; Rao et al. 2005; Schreckinger et al. 2010). Açai berries are also a rich source of the luteolin glycosides orientin 11 and homoorientin 12 which possess anti-oxidant properties and protect against radiation-induced DNA damage (Kang et al. 2010; Schreckinger et al. 2010).

Structure–activity relationship studies have shown that, in general, glycosylated flavonols and flavones have a weaker radical scavenging activity than their aglycone counterparts (Crozier et al. 2009; Rao et al. 2007). Furthermore, glycosylated flavonols and flavones are too hydrophylic to be absorbed by passive diffusion in the small intestine. The glycosides are hydrolyzed by enzymes in the brush-border of the small intestine’s epithelial cells and enter the epithelium as aglycones prior to undergoing further enzymatic modifications such as sulfation, glucuronidation, and methylation, and to the release into the blood stream. The major hydrolase present in the brush borders of the small intestine is lactase phloridizin hydrolase (Del Rio et al. 2010). Lactase phloridizin hydrolase has a broad specificity for flavonoid-_O_-β-D-glucosides (Del Rio et al. 2010). Flavonols and flavones that are not absorbed in the small intestine can be absorbed in the large intestine. The colonic microflora not only hydrolyzes the glycosides into the aglycone and the sugar molecule, but in most cases degrades the aglycone unit further into phenolic acids prior to the absorption into the blood stream (Crozier et al. 2009; Del Rio et al. 2010; Kang et al. 2010; Prior and Wu 2006). 

#### Flavanols, proanthocyanidins, and anthocyanidins

Flavanols are a class of flavonoids that possess a 2-phenyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-chromen-3-ol skeleton. Flavanols are widely used in Chinese traditional medicine to treat various diseases, including cancer (Beattie et al. 2005). The monomeric flavanol catechin, which is generally found in the (+)-catechin 13 form in nature, and its epimer epicatechin, which occurs naturally as the (−)-epicatechin 14 form, are major components of grapes, pomegranates, and of açai berries (Crozier et al. 2009). (+)-catechin 13 is one of the most potent natural ROS scavengers, and it provides skin cell protection against UVB-induced photoaging (Park et al. 2010; Wu et al. 2007). Both the catechol moiety in the B ring and the hydroxyl function in the C ring play an important role towards the ROS scavenging and sunscreen potential of 13 (Park et al. 2010; Wu et al. 2007). (+)-catechin 13 also interferes with the Ras/MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways, and it upregulates the expression of the pro-apoptotic proteins caspase 3 and Bax (Bcl-2-associated X protein) and downregulates the expression of MMP-1 (Crozier et al. 2009; Park et al. 2010; Wu et al. 2007). Like its epimer, (−)-epicatechin 14 is a good anti-oxidant, and it also inhibits the expression of iNOS (Rao et al. 2005). (+)-catechin 13 and (−)-epicatechin 14 can be hydroxylated to form (+)-gallocatechin 15 and (−)-epigallocatechin 16, which also possess anti-oxidant properties (Crozier et al. 2009). 13, 14, 15, and 16 can polymerize into proanthocyanidins, also referred to as _condensed tannins_ (Bors et al. 2001). Proanthocyanidins can occur as polymers of up to 50 flavanol units (Crozier et al. 2009). The most common type of proanthocyanidins contain (epi)catechins as flavanol units and are termed procyanidins, while the rarer prodelphinins are composed of (epi)gallocatechin units (Crozier et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2004). Proanthocyanidin are usually “B-type” polymers in which the C4 of the heterocycle is linked to the C6 or C8 of the adjacent unit. “A type” proanthocyanidins, which are less common in nature, have an additional ether bond between C2 and C7 (Crozier et al. 2009; USDA 2010; Wu et al. 2004). Proanthocyanidins commonly found in edible berries include the dimers epicatechin-4β-8)-catechin and catechin-4β-8)-epicatechin. The galloylation and polymerization of monomeric flavanols significantly enhances the latter’s ROS scavenging and pro-apoptotic properties (Bors et al. 2001; Lizarraga et al. 2008). Proanthocyanidins have been reported to prevent the phosphorylation of STATs, to decrease the secretion of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), to inhibit COX-2, and to interfere with the release of NO and of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α from carrageenin-induced paw oedema in rats (Garbacki et al. 2002, 2004; Hurst et al. 2010). The fate of proanthocanydins in the human gastrointestinal system after ingestion remains poorly understood to date, but animal studies have revealed that, due to the buffering effect of food bolus, the acid conditions in the stomach remain too mild for proanthocyanidins polymers to be degraded into flavanol monomers. Proanthocyanidin polymers are too large to be absorbed in the small intestine. They are broken down into aromatic acids by the microflora of the colon (Manach et al. 2005).

Amongst the berries included in the USDA food composition database, cranberries are by far the most important source of proanthocyanidins, followed by blueberries and black currants (Seeram 2008; USDA 2010). Black currants, red currants, and gooseberries contain both procyanidins and prodelphinidins in similar proportions, while elderberries have a very low proanthocyanidin to anthocyanin ratio (Wu et al. 2004). The proanthocyanidins found in those berries tend to be highly polymeric, with the majority of the proanthocyanidins containing more than ten monomeric units. However, raspberries, red currants, and pomegranates, only contain dimeric proanthocyanidins. The total amount of proanthocyanidins found in fresh berries is shown in Table 2.

Berries distinguish themselves from other fruits by being particularly rich in a further type of flavonoids, namely the flavylium (2-phenylchromenylium) cation-derived anthocyanidins (Beattie et al. 2005). Anthocyanidins share the same biosynthetic precursors, as proanthocyanidins, namely leucoanthocyanidins, which, themselves, derive from dihydroflavonols (Kovinich et al. 2012). Anthocyanidins are responsible for the bright red and purple colour of berries. In nature, anthocyanidins are normally found as glycosylated complexes referred to as anthocyanins. The six aglycon anthocyanidin units found in berry-derived anthocyanins include cyanidin 17, malvidin 18, delphinidin 19, peonidin 20, petunidin 21, and pelargonidin 22 (Beattie et al. 2005). The sugar moieties, which may be acylated by a range of aromatic or aliphatic acids, include glucose, sophorose, rutinose, rhamnose, galactose, arabinose, and xylose (Crozier et al. 2009; Prior and Wu 2006). Anthocyanidins are potent ROS scavengers and apoptosis inducers (Wang and Stoner 2008). The ROS scavenging activity of anthocyanins is due to the presence of hydroxyl groups in position 3 of the C ring and in the positions 3′, 4′, and 5′ of the B ring. In addition to ROS scavenging, the activation of detoxifying enzymes and of gluthatione-related endogenous anti-oxidants accounts for the strong anti-oxidant potential of anthocyanidins (Wang and Stoner 2008). Anthocyanidins also inhibit the transcriptional activity of NF-κB and the expression of VEGF, and induce the expression of the anti-angiogenic protein TIMP-2 (Bagchi et al. 2004; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Duthie 2007a; Wang and Stoner 2008; Wu et al. 2004). Finally, some anthocyanins possess the unusual ability to induce erythroid cell differentiation in leukaemia cells (Wang and Stoner 2008). The total amount of anthocyanidins present in fresh berry extracts is the single most important factor influencing the anti-oxidant and anti-cancer potential of the extracts (Bagchi et al. 2004; Basu and Penugonda 2009; Duthie 2007a; Wu et al. 2004). Amongst the anthocyanidins, non-acetylated monoglycolsylated molecules tend to be the most bioactive ones (Jing et al. 2008). Urinary recovery tests have shown that the bioavailability of anthocyanidins is greatly affected by the level of glycosylation of the molecules (Crozier et al. 2009; Prior and Wu 2006). As a matter of fact, the aglycone units are unstable in the small intestine and in the colon (pH &gt; 4) and rely on the glycone units for structural stabilty in the small intestine, and to be absorbed into the blood stream as intact molecules (Crozier et al. 2009; Del Rio et al. 2010; Prior and Wu 2006). Unlike other flavonoids, anthocyanidins exist as a balanced combination of four different forms, and the proportion in which each form is present depends on the acidity of the chemical environment. The red-coloured flavylium cation is only predominant at pH &lt;2\. In more alkaline environments, the three remaining forms, which consist of a blue quinoidal base, a colourless carbinol pseudobase, and a colourless chalcone pseudobase form prevail. In the small intestine, the carbinol pseudobase predominates (Crozier et al. 2009; Del Rio et al. 2010; Prior and Wu 2006). On average, 40 % of the anthocyanin intake is recovered in ileal fluid (González-Barrio et al. 2010). Anthocyanins can be absorbed into blood plasma as intact molecules or as methylated or glucuronidated derivatives, but the level of absorption tends to be very low (Del Rio et al. 2010; Prior and Wu 2006; Talavéra et al. 2004). The uptake into the plasma occurs within minutes after the oral intake of the berry extracts. The presence of anthocyanins in the blood stream is generally very short-lived, and after 6 h, no traces of anthocyanins can be found in either blood plasma or urine samples (Talavéra et al. 2004). This observation supports the hypotheses that the plasma uptake of anthocyanins is, in general, very poor. Other explanations for the low level of recovery of anthocyanins in plasma and urine samples include the fact that anthocyanins can be stored in various tissues throughout the body, including the brain, the eyes, and the liver, and the possibility that anthocyanins potentially present in the plasma and urine might be overlooked for being in their colorless carbinol pseudobase form, rather than in their intensely colored red flavylium form (Del Rio et al. 2010; Talavéra et al. 2004). Anthocyanins that reach the large intestine are hydrolyzed by the intestinal microflora. The resulting anthocyanidin aglycones are unstable and rapidly metabolized to phenolic acids, which can penetrate into the blood stream (Prior and Wu 2006). Cyanidin 17 is metabolized into the phenolic acid protocatechuic acid 23, while malvidin 18 is metabolized into syringic acid 24, delphinidin 19 into gallic acid 25, peonidin 20 into vanillic acid 26, pentunidin 21 into 3-methoxy-4,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid 27, and pelargonidin 22 into 4-hydroxybenzoic acid 28 (Crozier et al. 2009). Pyranoanthocyanins, which result from the fermentation of anthocyanins in wine and in non-sterilized berry juices account for a high bioavailability of anti-oxidants from these beverages (Rein et al. 2005).

In vitro assays have shown that the anthocyanidin aglycones cyanidin 17, delphinidin 19, and petunidin 21 inhibit the phosphorylation of MAPK1/2, JNK1/2, and ERK1/2 by binding to and inhibiting the kinases Raf1 and MAP2K1 upstream of them. Subsequently, 17, 19, and 21 inhibit the activation of NF-κB and AP-1, thereby suppressing the expression of COX-2 and the secretion of prostaglandin E2 in various cell types (Hou et al. 2004; Kang et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2010; Prior and Wu 2006; Wang and Stoner 2008). The binding of 17, 19, and 21 to the kinases Raf1 and MAP2K1 is dependent on the presence of the ortho-dihydroxyphenyl structure on the B-ring of the the anthocyanidins, as neither of the anthocyanidins malvidin 18, peonidin 20, and pelargonidin 22 possesses the latter biological property (Hou et al. 2004). The binding of 17, 19, and 21 to the kinases Raf1 and MAP2K1 has also been shown to be non-competitive with ATP (Kang et al. 2008). Delphinidin 19 induces G2/M cell cycle arrest in prostate cancer (Hafeez et al. 2008). Malvidin 18, delphinidin 19, and their glycosidic counterparts induce apoptosis by inhibiting NF-κB, by down-regulating Bcl-2, and by increasing the expression of Bax and of caspases 3 and 9 (Beattie et al. 2005; Hafeez et al. 2008; Katsube et al. 2003; Prior and Wu 2006). The cyanidin 17 glycosides cyanidin-3-glucoside 29, cyanidin-3-rutinoside 30, cyanidin-3-(2(G)-xylosylrutinoside) 31, and cyanidin-3_O_-sophoroside 32 are potent anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and pro-apoptotic agents. 29, 30, 31, and 32 inhibit the activation of AP-1 and of NF-κB by targeting the PI-3K/Akt and JNK MAPK signaling cascades (Duncan et al. 2009; Li et al. 2008; Prior and Wu 2006; Wyzgoski et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2010; Zikri et al. 2009). Cyanidin-3-glucoside 29 and cyanidin-3-rutinoside 30 have also been shown to act as anti-angiogenic agents by down-regulating MMP-2, and by enhancing the production of TIMP-2 in human lung cancer cells (Amin et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2006; Quin et al. 2010). Açai berries, which are by far the strongest anti-oxidants amongst the all the berries described in the present paper, possess as major anthocyanins cyanidin-3-glucoside 29, cyanidin-3-rutinoside 30, delphinidin-3-(6″-acetoyl)glucoside 33, peonidin-3-rutinoside 34, and peonidin-3-(6″-malonylglucoside) 35 (Hogan et al. 2010). The major anthocyanins found in blueberries are delphinidin-3-galactoside 36, petunidin-3-glucoside 37, and malvidin-3-arabinoside 38 (Beattie et al. 2005). Blackberries and red raspberries contain primarily cyanidin glucosides (Beattie et al. 2005; Neto et al. 2008; Seeram et al. 2006). The major anthocyanins found in black raspberries include cyanidin-3-glucoside 29, cyanidin-3-rutinoside 30, cyanidin-3-(2(G)-xylosylrutinoside) 31, and cyanidin-3-sophoroside 32 (Duncan et al. 2009; Neto et al. 2008; Stoner et al. 2008). Black currants are characterized by rutinosides and glucosides of cyanidin 17 `and of delphinidin 19, while red currants contain primarily cyanidin diglycosides (Beattie et al. 2005; Lyall et al. 2009; Prior and Wu 2006). The major anthocyanins found in cranberries are cyanidin galactosides and arabinosides (Neto et al. 2008; Seeram et al. 2006). Elderberries contain primarily cyanidin-3-glucoside 29 and cyanidin-3-sambubioside 39 (Abuja et al. 1998). Other anthocyanins found in elderberries include cyanidin-3-rhamnoglucoside 40, cyanidin-3-xyloglucoside 41, cyanidin-3,5-diglucoside 42, and cyanidin-3-sambubioside-5-glucoside 43 (Thole et al. 2006). Gooseberries contain cyanidin-3-glucoside 29, cyanidin-3-rutinoside 30, peonidin-3-rutinoside 34 peonidin-3-glucoside 44, and cyanidin-3-xyloside 45 (Jordheim et al. 2007). Gooseberries also contain the aromatic acylated anthocyanins cyanin-3-_O_-β-(6″-_E_-caffeoylglucopyranoside) 46 and 3-_O_-β-(6″-_E_-_p_-coumaroylglucopyranoside) 47 (Jordheim et al. 2007; Wu et al. 2004). Mulberries, which are used as medicinal food in China, contain glucosides and rutinosides of cyanidin 17 and of pelargonidin 22 (Amin et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2006; Henning et al. 2010; Quin et al. 2010; Stoner et al. 2008; Zikri et al. 2009). Pomegranates are particularly rich in cyanidin-, delphinidin-, and pelargonidin-3-glucoside and 3,5-diglucoside (Adams et al. 2006; Afaq et al. 2005; Khan et al. 2007), and strawberries contain predominantly pelargonidin glycosides (Adams et al. 2006; Beattie et al. 2005; Neto et al. 2008).

### Ellagitannins

Ellagitannins are hydrolysable tannin polymers. They consist of a central glycine unit (d-glucose) esterified to aglycone units (primarily units of hexahydroxydiphenic acid 48, which is a dimeric form of gallic acid 25) (Bors et al. 2001; Heber 2008). Ellagitannins are strong anti-oxidants. They also stimulate apoptosis and inhibit NF-κB, inflammation, angiogenesis, and prostate cancer cell growth (Heber 2008). SAR studies have shown that the anti-oxidant properties of ellagitannins increase with the level of polymerization, but decreases with the level of glycosylation. Large polyphenolic polymers contain a high number of hydroxy functions that can donate hydrogen atoms and support unpaired electrons (Bakkalbaşi et al. 2009). Ellagitannins are subjected to acid hydrolysis in the stomach and in the small intestine, releasing the phenol ellagic acid 49, which is rapidly absorbed into blood plasma (Del Rio et al. 2010). Ellagitannins and ellagic acid 49 reaching the large intestine are metabolized to urolithin C 50 and D 51, Urolithin C 50 and D 51 are further metabolized to urolithin A 52 and B 53, which undergo modifications such as glucuronidation and methylation before being excreted in urine. The resulting metabolites urolithin A-3-_O_-glucuronide 54, urolithin B-3-_O_-glucuronide 55, 3,8-_O_-dimethylellagic acid-2-_O_-glucuronide 56, and methylated urolithin B appear in urine samples within 12–36 h following berry intake (Cerd et al. 2005; Del Rio et al. 2010; Heber 2008). The chemical transformations of ellagitannins in the gastrointestinal tract are illustrated in Fig. 5. Concerning bioavailibilty, urolithins circulate in plasma as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates at concentrations in the range of 0.2–20 μM (Espin et al. 2013). Moreover a recent report quantified and determined 11 phenolic acids in rat plasma, urine, and liver by ultraperformance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS) (Espin et al. 2013).

While blueberries and cranberries contain predominantly condensed tannins (proanthocyanidins), raspberries, strawberries, blackberries raspberries, strawberries, and pomegranates contain primarily hydrolyzable tannins (ellagitannins) (Adams et al. 2006; Heber 2008). The major ellagitannin found in berries is sanguiin-H6 (lambertianin A) 57 (Bakkalbaşi et al. 2009). Along with sanguiin-H6 57, raspberries and blackberries contain sanguiin-H10 58 and lambertianin C 59 as major ellagitannins (González-Barrio et al. 2010). Pomegranates also contain large amounts of pedunculagin 60, granatin B 61, strictinin A 62, corilagin 63, punicalin 64, and punicalagin 65, which is the largest polyphenol in terms of molecular weight known to date (Heber 2008). In vitro assays have shown that sanguiin-H6 57, pedunculagin 60 and strictinin A 62 are cytotoxic to melanoma cells (IC50 &lt; 3 μM) (Kashiwada et al. 1992), and that punicalagin 65 inhibits the proliferation of human oral, colon, and prostate tumor cells (Adams et al. 2006). Sanguiin-H6 57, pedunculagin 60 and strictinin A 62 have been shown to possess pro-apoptotic effects on cancer cells (Kashiwada et al. 1992). Sanguiin-H6 57 also prevents angiogenesis in endothelial cells by interfering with the binding of VEGF to its receptor on the cellular membrane (Afaq et al. 2005). Punicalin 64 and punicalagin 65 arrest the cell cycle at the S phase by downregulating cyclin-dependent kinases A and B1 which are required for the progress from the S phase to G2/M phases (Bialonska et al. 2010). Granatin B 61, strictinin A 62, corilagin 63, punicalin 64, and punicalagin 65 decrease the production of NO, COX-2, and PGE2 (Afaq et al. 2005; Dong et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2010; Seeram et al. 2006). Corilagin 63 also inhibits the activation of NF-κB and the production of the cytokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in activated microglia (Dong et al. 2010). Noteworthy, sanguiin H-6 57 is the only raspberry-derived ellagitannin recovered in the ileal fluid, with a 23 % recovery rate. Sanguiin H-10 58 and lambertianin C 59 are too large to be absorbed in the small intestine (González-Barrio et al. 2010). Despite its size, punicalagin 65 can, to a certain extend, be absorbed into plasma, but the bulk of consumed punicalagin 65 is, like the majority of ellagitannins, hydrolysed to ellagic acid 49 in the small intestine and catalyzed to urolithins in the large intestine (Afaq et al. 2005; Bialonska et al. 2010).

### Phenolic acids and urolithins

Although they are often overlooked when assessing the nutraceutical benefits of berries and of fruits and vegetables in general, phenolic acids and urolithins are present in large quantities in the human body following berry consumption, as they are the principal metabolites resulting from the degradation of flavonoids and ellagitannins in the gastrointestinal tract. Furthermore, phenolic acids and urolithins tend to be readily absorbed into the blood plasma, and to prevail in the body for relatively long periods of time as a consequence of enterohepatic recirculation (Crozier et al. 2009; Del Rio et al. 2010; González-Barrio et al. 2010; Heber 2008; Kang et al. 2010).

Phenolic acids found in edible berries or metabolized from berry-derived flavonoids or ellagitannins by the human gut microflora include the benzoic acids protocatechuic acid 23, syringic acid 24, gallic acid 25, vanillic acid 26, 3-methoxy-4,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid 27, p-hydroxybenzoic acid 28, ellagic acid 49, and salicylic acid 66, and the cinnamic acids p-coumaric acid 67, caffeic acid 68, ferulic acid 69, and sinapic acid 70 (Häkkinen et al. 1999). Gallic acid 25 and ellagic acid 49 arrest the cell cycle at the S phase by downregulating cyclin-dependent kinases A and B1 which are required for the progress from S to G2/M. Gallic acid 25 is one of the major compounds responsible for the anti-angiogenic activity of black raspberries (Bialonska et al. 2010; Ehala et al. 2005). Ellagic acid 49 induces apoptosis in cancer cells (Beattie et al. 2005; Ross et al. 2007). The molecular targets of ellagic acid 49 are p53, JNK, p38, cdk2, NF-κB, COX-2, VEGF, MMP-2 and 9 (Amin et al. 2009; González-Barrio et al. 2010). Ferulic acid 69 induces cell cycle arrest at the G2/M interface in oral cancer cell lines in vitro and inhibits the development of malignant oral tumors in vivo in rats. A daily low-dose consumption (300 mg) of aspirin, a prodrug to salicylic acid 66 has been recognized as an effective chemopreventive treatment against colon cancer, which is the second most frequent malignancy in affluent countries. A long-term consumption of low-dose aspirin has also been shown to reduce the risk of oesophagal and gastric cancer and of cardiovascular diseases, although patients with a high risk of gastrointestinal complications should avoid a long-term consumption of aspirin or should be concomitantly treated with prostaglandin receptor antagonists or with proton pump inhibitors due to the risk of mucosal injury in the upper gastrointestinal tract (Lanas 2011). Ellagic acid 49 is the metabolite resulting from the degradation of ellagitannins by the gut microflora (Amin et al. 2009; González-Barrio et al. 2010). Ellagic acid 49 is also found in nature in strawberries, blackberries, and raspberries (Ehala et al. 2005). Strawberries and black raspeberries are also rich in ferulic acid 69. Black currants are rich in p-coumaric acid 67 (Amin et al. 2009; González-Barrio et al. 2010; Häkkinen et al. 1999). Red currants are rich in p-hydroxybenzoic acid 28, p-coumaric acid 67, caffeic acid 68, and ferulic acid 69 (Häkkinen et al. 1999). Cranberries contain p-hydroxybenzoic acid 28, vanillic acid 26, p-coumaric acid 67, ferulic acid 69, caffeic acid 68, and sinapic acid 70. Pomegranate is rich in caffeic acid 68, punicic acid 75, and corilagin 63 (Dong et al. 2010). Compared to other berries, and to other fruits in general, black currants contain a high level of salicylic acid 66 (&gt;50 mg/kg of fruit) (Borges et al. 2010).

The ellagitannin metabolites urolithins C 50 and D 51, start to appear in significant amounts in the jejunum, which is the middle section of the small intestine. Subsequent modifications along the gastrointestinal tract lead to the formation of urolithin A 52 and B 53 (Bialonska et al. 2010). Urolithin A 52 has a lower anti-oxidant potential than its metabolic precursors ellagic acid 49, urolithins C 50 and D 51, but the anti-oxidant activity is expressed over a long period of time, as the compound remains in systemic circulation for up to 72 h (Bialonska et al. 2010). Urolithin B 53 does not possess any anti-oxidant activity, but both urolithin A 52 and B 53 inhibit cancer development and inflammation through interferences with the MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways. Furthermore, urolithin A 52 possesses prebiotic properties (Bialonska et al. 2010; González-Barrio et al. 2010; Heber 2008; Talavéra et al. 2004). The absorbtion capacity of urolithins into the blood stream increases with the molecules’ lipophilicity. Urolithin A-3-_O_-glucuronide 54 and urolithin B-3-_O_-glucuronide 55 are readily absorbed, urolithin 3,8-_O_-dimethylellagic acid-2-_O_-glucuronide 56 is only found in traces in the circulation. Substantial quantities of urolithin A 52 derivatives and glucuronides and methyl glucuronides of ellagic acid have been found in bile, indicating high levels of hepatic metabolism and active enterohepatic circulation (Del Rio et al. 2010).

### Stilbenoids

Stilbenoids are phytoallexin sproduced by plants in response of physical or chemical stress, pathogenic infection, or injury (Crozier et al. 2009). The stilbene resveratrol 6 commonly found in grapes, blueberries, cranberries, and mulberries inhibits NF-κB and AP-1 activation and the expression of COX-2 (Khan et al. 2010; Neto 2007a). The inhibition of NF-κB by resveratrol 6 results in part from the natural products ability to activate the deacetylase sirtuin 1 which is known to deacetylate and deactivate NF-κB (Crozier et al. 2009). Resveratrol 6 acts as a pro-apoptotic agent by down-regulating pro-survival proteins such as Bcl-xL and by up-regulating the pro-apoptotic proteins p53, Bax, and caspase 3(Balkwill and Mantovani 2001; Khan et al. 2010). Resveratrol 6 also arrests cancer cells at the G1/S checkpoint by modulating cyclins D and E (Khan et al. 2010).

## Terpenoids

The pentacyclic triterpenoid ursolic acid 71 and its _cis_ and _trans_ p-hydroxycinnamate esters are found in the waxy outer layer of various types of berries, and in cranberries and blueberries in particular (Neto 2007a). Ursolic acid 71 inhibit the growth, proliferation, and mutation of a wide range of cancer cell lines by inhibiting the activity of cylcooxygenases, by inducing G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis through the activation of caspase 3, and by decreasing the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 (Neto et al. 2008).

The triterpenoid lupeol 72 found in strawberries and grapes has potent anti-oxidant, anti-proliferative, anti-mutagenic, and anti-inflammatory properties (_esp_. arthritis): PARP cleavage induction, increase in FADD protein and Fas receptor expression, upregulation of Bax, caspases 3 and 9, downregulation of Bcl-2; also G2/M cell cycle arrest (Khan et al. 2010{Amin, 2009 #63). Lupeol 72 also induces cell differentiation in human leukaemia cells (Amin et al. 2009; Siddiqui et al. 2008). Other molecular targets of lupeol 72 include NF-κB, COX-2, Fas induction, PARP expression induction, Bcl-2, Akt, cyclin D1/D2, Ras, iNOS (Khan et al. 2010; Siddiqui et al. 2008). The carotenoids β-carotene 73 and lutein 74 are abundant in most types of berries. A physiological concentrations, these carotenoids act as anti-oxidants and contribute towards the inhibition of breast and colon cancer proliferation (Tanaka et al. 2012).

## Fatty acids

The polyunsaturated fatty acid punicic acid 75 is a major component of pomegranate seeds. Punicic acid 75 is a potent inhibitor of prostate cancer in vitro, and it has anti-obesity properties in mice (Lansky et al. 2005).

## Micronutrients

Berries are also very rich in vitamin C, which is a potent anti-oxidant and plays a role in iron absorption, and hormone synthesis, and in folic acid, which acts as an anti-cancer agent by maintaining DNA stability (Beattie et al. 2005). Cranberries, blueberries, and black currants have the highest concentrations of vitamin C (100 mg/100 g of fresh fruit) (Häkkinen et al. 1999).

Berries are also rich sources of vitamin A, B9 (folic acid), C (ascorbic acid) and E (tocopherol), as well as calcium, and selenium. Vitamin C and E and selenium are anti-oxidants (Siddiqui et al. 2008). Vitamin E induces cell-cycle arrest in cancer cells.

## Concluding remarks and future perspectives

Berries are rich sources of bioactive nutrients, and essentially experimental data suggest that the regular consumption of berries or of berry-derived natural products can help prevent and treat a wide range of pathologies, including cancer and inflammatory diseases. These assumptions are nevertheless largely based on in vitro data obtained with complex extracts/polyphenols/phenolic acids/terpenoids etc. It has to be clearly stated that results cannot readily be extrapolated human beings consuming berries or related products.

Moreover, we have presented the chemistry of the major compounds found in edible berries and berry-like fruits, and the bioactivities of the compounds have been described. With their abundance in anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory activities, berries could be regarded as good food sources to follow Hippocrates’ advise to “Let food be thy medicine, and medicine be thy food” (Hippocrates, circa 400 B.C.). While epidemiological data are not yet available for all types of berries, it is generally accepted that two cups of unsweetened berry juice a day represent the required daily amount of berry consumption in order to benefit from the healthy properties of berries described in the present review (Basu and Penugonda 2009). It is noteworthy that the chemical composition can vary based on the environmental conditions during the cultivation and storage, and based on the ripeness of the fruits (Bakkalbaşi et al. 2009; Beekwilder et al. 2005). Kalt et al. (1999) recommend storing berries at or slightly above room temperature to maintain a high anti-oxidant power. Del Rio et al. (2010) have reported that the coingestion of berry-derived anthocyanidins with phytic acid found in the hulls of seeds, nuts, and grains increase the bioavailability of anthocyanins by a factor of 6, while the simultaneous consumption of milk reduces the anti-oxidant potential of berries. Synergy between the different natural products found in berries has been observed, and hence it is more beneficial to consume berries whole, rather than purified compounds isolated from the berries (Del Rio et al. 2010).

### Acknowledgments

Research at the Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer (LBMCC) is financially supported by “Recherche Cancer et Sang” foundation, by «Recherches Scientifiques Luxembourg» asbl, by «Een Häerz fir Kriibskrank Kanner» association, the Action Lions “Vaincre le Cancer” Luxembourg, The Fonds National de la Recherche Luxembourg, Televie Luxembourg and the Foundation for Scientific Cooperation between Germany and Luxemburg is thanked for additional support. Further support was received from the European Union (ITN “RedCat” 215009 and Interreg IVa project “Corena”). MD is supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) by the MEST of Korea for Tumor Microenvironment Global Core Research Center (GCRC) grant, [Grant Number 2012-0001184]; by the Seoul National University Research grant and by the Research Settlement Fund for the new faculty of SNU.
