

Like other fatty fish, herring contains the marine fatty acids docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which have chemopreventive properties. These marine fatty acids have been shown to inhibit proliferation of breast cancer cells in the laboratory. Relatively high fatty fish intake has been shown to be associated with reduced risk of breast cancer and improved survival. In one experiment, diets incorporating higher omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acid ratios reduced mammary gland density in mice, which in turn reduced carcinogen-induced mammary tumor development. Fish oil has been shown to inhibit early stages of mammary tumor development in a mouse model of HER-2/neu overexpressing (HER2+) breast cancer. DHA has been demonstrated to reduce bone metastasis in a mouse model of breast cancer.

Many epidemiological studies have found convincing evidence of a negative association between DHA and EPA intake or fatty fish consumption and the risk of breast cancer, but not all are in agreement. A study of Finnish fishermen and their wives found that while their high fish consumption appeared to reduce mortality overall (despite high intakes of environmental contaminants in the fish), it did not reduce mortality from cancer in the women. A Swedish study comparing the breast cancer rates of two large groups of fishermen's wives found a lower risk of breast cancer for those residing on the west coast of Sweden compared to the east (Baltic) coast, where the fish are known to be contaminated with more organochlorine compounds.

Several studies have found that higher omega-3/omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid ratios are associated with reduced risk of breast cancer and consuming herring or similar fish would tend to improve this ratio for most women.

Marine fatty acids have also been found to enhance the therapeutic effects of tamoxifen and chemotherapy drugs such as Adriamycin and Taxol. However, note that recent research suggests that herring, sardines and similar fish such as anchovies should not be consumed the day before through the day after a chemotherapy treatment and consumed only in moderation during the remaining days of each cycle. Herring and similar fish contain a fatty acid (hexadeca-4,7,10,13-tetraenoic acid) that can induce resistance to a broad spectrum of chemotherapy drugs.

