

Pomegranates and pomegranate extracts have been shown to inhibit breast cancer cell proliferation and invasion and promote cell apoptosis in both estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and negative ER- breast cancer cells in a dose dependent manner, as well as preventing mammary tumor formation in HER2/neu transgenic mice. Pomegranate seed oil, fermented pomegranate juice polyphenols, and ellagic acid have all been shown to inhibit angiogenesis in breast cancer cells. Pomegranate fermented juice polyphenols and pomegranate seed oil have also been shown to reduce the number of carcinogen-induced mammary tumors in mice. In addition, pomegranates have been shown to inhibit aromatase activity.

Pomegranate juice has been shown to inhibit metastatic processes in breast cancer cells. Both pomegranate juice and the combination of luteolin, ellagic acid and punicic acid stimulated the expression of genes that increase breast cancer cell adhesion, as well as inhibiting genes that stimulate cell migration and inhibit breast cancer cells movement to the bone in one study. In addition, the treatments reduced pro-inflammatory compounds, which implies that they could reduce inflammation and its promotion of cancer progression.

Pomegranates would appear to be an ideal chemopreventative agent against breast cancer were it not for the fact that pomegranates (and especially pomegranate seeds) are a significant source of a wide variety of phytoestrogens (plant estrogens). While pomegranate juice is beneficial, its estrogenic components may make pomegranate harmful at concentrated dosages (even for ER- cancer) and we do not know the levels or conditions under which this might be true. The safety and efficacy of consumption of large amounts of pomegranate juice, pomegranate seed oil and pomegranate extract needs to be confirmed in large scale clinical trials. Therefore, we conclude that breast cancer patients, survivors and those at high risk can enjoy pomegranates and pomegranate juice in moderation, but should avoid "enhanced" pomegranate juice, pomegranate seed oil and pomegranate extracts.

