# Occurrence of zearalenone in fresh corn and corn products collected from local Hispanic markets in San Diego County, CA

## Abstract

Estrogenic mycotoxins such as zearalenone (ZON) produced by several species of _Fusarium_ fungi can be found in many foods including corn and corn products. The contamination by the fungi can occur either in the field or during storage. Corn and corn products represent a significant part of Hispanic diets. Hispanic females can become exposed to ZON during the consumption of these products. The estrogenic property of ZON might promote precocious puberty in young girls and abnormal hormone balances in women. Corn and corn products were procured from local area Hispanic markets. A single laboratory validated method was used to determine ZON in these products. The limit of detection (LOD) for the method was 2.0 ng g−1. The recovery rate of ZON spiked tortillas was 95%, 76% and 114%, masa was 102%, 98% and 107%, and whole corn was 92%, 89% and 94%, at concentrations of 5, 20, and 100 ng g−1 respectively. A total of 35 corn products, collected from small family owned markets in the Spanish speaking areas most likely to sell products consumed by the local Hispanic population, were analyzed (8 yellow and 7 white corn tortilla samples, 9 masa samples, 5 whole white corn and 5 whole yellow corn samples and 1 nixtamalized corn sample). ZON was found in 10 of 15 tortilla samples with a mean of 1.60 ng g−1. Of the 9 masa samples, ZON was found in 7 samples with a mean of 4.52 ng g−1. ZON was found in 4 fresh whole corn samples, averaging 0.71 ng g−1. The nixtamalized corn sample contained a mean level of 10.31 ng g−1 ZON. ZON was more frequently found in the masa compared to the tortillas and fresh whole corn.