# Docosahexanoic Acid Improves Chemotherapy Efficacy by Inducing CD95 Translocation to Lipid Rafts in ER− Breast Cancer Cells

## Abstract

Docosahexanoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) have been shown to possess anti-carcinogenic properties in mammary cancers, both in vitro and in vivo. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of treating three different breast cancer cell lines with DHA or EPA on cellular growth, chemotherapy efficacy, and CD95 expression and localization in the cell. MDA-MB-231, MCF-7 and SKBr-3 cells were incubated with EPA or DHA with or without chemotherapy agents [doxorubicin (dox), Herceptin]. Cell growth was assessed by WST-1 assay and CD95 expression was investigated using flow cytometry, Western blotting and confocal microscopy. DHA and EPA inhibited the growth of all three breast cancer cell lines in a dose-dependent fashion (_P_ &lt; 0.05). DHA, and to a lesser extent EPA, induced the movement and raft clustering of CD95 in the cell membrane (via confocal microscopy) and the surface expression (via flow cytometry) in MDA-MB-231 cells. Neither fatty acid altered the growth/metabolic activity of the non-transformed MCF-12A breast cell line. Pre-treatment with DHA, but not EPA, improved the efficacy of dox in estrogen receptor negative MDA-MB-231 cells (_P_ &lt; 0.05), but not in the other two cell lines. Pre-treating cells with DHA increased CD95 surface expression (threefold) and the plasma membrane raft content of CD95 (2fold) and FADD (&gt;4-fold) after dox treatment, compared to dox treatment alone (_P_ &lt; 0.05). This study demonstrated that pre-treatment of estrogen receptor negative MDA-MB-231 cells with DHA increased the anti-cancer effects of dox and presents evidence to suggest that this may be mediated in part by CD95-induced apoptosis.

### Keywords

Breast cancer n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids CD95 Chemotherapy Cell death Apoptosis FADD

### List of symbols

### Abbreviations



















## Introduction

The long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) n-3 fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA) have been shown to exert a number of beneficial biological properties, including anti-cancer effects [1–4]. Our group and others have demonstrated that DHA and EPA decrease the in vitro growth of breast cancer cells, including estrogen receptor (ER)-negative [4–9] and ER-positive [10–14] cell lines. Considerable research exists demonstrating that oral intake of EPA and DHA inhibits the growth of mammary tumors in animal models [3, 9]. While it is recognized that n-3 PUFA alter tumor growth in cell and animal models, current understanding of the cellular mechanisms is incomplete. Several candidate mechanisms have been proposed for the action of n-3 PUFA on breast cancer cells, including alterations in membrane structure and composition, as well as changes in membrane-mediated functions and signals (e.g., lipid rafts, lipid second messengers, signaling proteins, downstream transcription factors, and lipid peroxides) [9]. The cell membrane is a dynamic, asymmetric, heterogeneous structure containing lipid rafts. These microdomains are enriched in saturated fatty acids, sphingolipids, cholesterol and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked proteins [15, 16]. Rafts also contain an abundance of signaling proteins [17], suggesting a role in signal transduction, possibly by facilitating the interaction of signaling molecules with their corresponding receptors [18]. EPA and DHA are known to be readily incorporated into tumor cell membranes when provided in the diet or in cell culture media [2, 19–21] and to alter lipid raft organization [22]. Studies from our laboratory show that EPA and DHA are also incorporated into lipid rafts of MDA-MB-231 [5] and MCF-7 (unpublished data) breast cancer cells in vitro, and this is associated with reduced raft epidermal growth factor receptor expression in MDA-MB-231 cells [5].

There is evidence that suggests that long chain n-3 PUFA may also augment chemotherapy treatment of breast cancer. For example, breast cancer patients with a higher concentration of DHA in breast adipose tissue respond more favorably to chemotherapy than those with lower adipose DHA [23]. A recent open-label, single-arm, phase II study demonstrated that a daily intake of 1.8 g of DHA during anthracycline-based chemotherapy in breast cancer patients resulted in the longest overall survival for patients with the highest plasma DHA [24]. Correspondingly, there are in vitro and rodent-model studies indicating that n-3 PUFA sensitize breast cancer cells to the effects of chemotherapy (reviewed in [9, 25]).

A detailed understanding of the cellular processes responsible for the effects of DHA and EPA, not only on cell growth, but also on the action of chemotherapy drugs is lacking. We previously demonstrated that n-3 PUFA induced cell death through an apoptotic mechanism, the initiation of which is unknown [4]. The transmembrane death receptor CD95 (APO-1/Fas) is the best characterized member of the death receptors that activate the extrinsic apoptosis pathway [26]. Activation results in CD95 aggregation in the plasma membrane, followed closely by recruitment of Fas-associated death domain-containing protein (FADD) and caspase-8 to the CD95 receptor, forming the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) [27]. Treatment of tumor cells with doxorubicin (dox), a widely used antineoplastic drug therapy, has been shown to induce apoptosis and the movement of DISC to membrane rafts [28, 29]. Given the ability of DHA and EPA to alter lipid raft structure and function, we hypothesized that EPA and/or DHA may initiate cell-death by altering lipid raft-CD95 co-localization.

To increase the understanding of the mechanisms of action of n-3 PUFA on breast cancer cells, this study aimed to determine the impact on cell growth of treating three human cancer cell lines in vitro with DHA or EPA with and without dox and to identify the impact on the cellular content and location of the CD95 death receptor.

## Materials and Methods

### Cell Culture

Cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). MDA-MB-231 cells were maintained in Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium, MCF-7 cells in minimum essential medium, MCF-12A in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium with 20 ng/ml epidermal growth factor, 100 ng/ml 1 cholera toxin, 10 μg/ml insulin and 500 ng/ml hydrocortisone, and SKBr-3 cells in McCoy’s 5A medium. All media were supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin, and 5 % v/v fetal calf serum (all media components from Gibco Invitrogen Corporation, Burlington, ON, Canada). Cells were grown at 37 °C in 5 % CO2 at 98 % relative humidity. Cells were seeded at 1 × 106 cells per flask (75 cm2) in 15 ml of medium and allowed 48 h to adhere prior to the application of experimental conditions. For WST-1 viability experiments cells were seeded in 96-well plates, and for immunofluorescence experiments cells were grown on coverslips in 12-well plates. All experiments were initiated at 75–80 % confluence of cells.

### Conjugated Fatty Acids

Fatty acids were purchased from NuChek Prep Inc. (Elysian, MN). Fatty acids were conjugated to bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma Aldrich) as follows: fatty acids were solubilized in ethanol, dried under nitrogen gas and resuspended in 1 ml potassium hydroxide (0.1 M and incubated and 50 °C for 10 min). BSA was added drop-wise (9 ml, 7.5 %) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Solutions were filtered through a 0.22 μm syringe filter and stored at −20 °C.

### Control Conditions and Experimental Design

A series of preliminary experiments comparing the fatty acid profiles of human breast tissue to that of cultured cell lines indicated that the fatty acids supplied in the culture media described above were not sufficient to optimize cell growth and the supply of n-6 fatty acids (data not shown). To ameliorate this deficiency we supplemented all conditions with 40 μM oleic acid (OLA) and 40 μM linoleic acid (LNA); this was considered the control condition (rather than plain culture media). Neither of these fatty acids exerts cytotoxic effects at those concentrations or even tenfold higher concentrations (data not shown). After 48 h of incubation in fatty acid-free medium, the culture medium was replaced with 15 ml of fresh medium containing the experimental fatty acids (on a background of 40 μM OLA/40 μM LNA) and the cells were further incubated for 48 h (treatments were reapplied after 24 h). For chemotherapy and other subsequent experiments, EPA and DHA concentrations were selected to yield approximately equivalent effects on cell death among differing cell lines. For chemotherapy experiments, after this initial 48 h fatty-acid pre-treatment, the fatty acids were removed and chemotherapy agents, specific for the cell lines, were added for 24 h. To choose concentrations of chemotherapy agents, preliminary experiments were conducted to yield equivalent cell death (approximately 20 %) in each of the studied cell lines in response to chemotherapy at 24 h (data not shown; 1.5 × 10−6 M dox for MCF-7, 4.1 × 10−7 M for MDA-MB-231, and 11 μg/ml of Herceptin™ for the dox-resistant HER2/c-erb-2 over-expressing SKBr-3 cell line). Cells were then harvested using trypsin-ethylenetriaminetetraacetic acid (Gibco Invitrogen Corporation, Burlington, ON).

### Assessment of Cell Growth via Cellular Viability

Cellular viability was assessed using the cell proliferation reagent, WST-1 (Roche Applied Science, Laval, PQ), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Previous studies with the MTT assay confirmed that incubation with DHA and EPA reduced cell numbers [5]. Preliminary studies were conducted to confirm that reduction in WST-1 activity after incubation with DHA or EPA was consistent with a reduced number of MCF-7 or MDA-MB-231 cells. To confirm that viability was due to a decrease in cell numbers, cell counts were performed (_n_ = 3) for EPA at 100 μM and DHA at 60 μM for 48 h and compared to 100 μM OLA for both the MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells.

### Immunofluorescence and Confocal Microscopy

Cells were seeded (5 × 105 cells/well) onto sterile coverslips in 12-well culture plates and incubated until 80 % confluence was reached. Fatty acid and chemotherapy treatment was carried out as described above. Cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde, and after 1 h of blocking with 1 % BSA in PBS, were incubated with the monoclonal antibodies anti-CD95 (Abcam, San Francisco, CA, USA) and Alexafluor 555-conjugated cholera toxin subunit B (CTxB) (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS, Alexafluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody was added. Nuclei were stained with 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Coverslips were inverted onto microscope slides, in mounting medium Fluorsave. Slides were examined with a Zeiss Axiovert 100 M confocal microscope coupled with a Zeiss LSM510 laser scanning system (Germany). Images were taken with a 63× Plan-apochromat n.a. 1.4 with a zoom factor of 2. Alexafluor 488 was scanned with an argon laser (excitation wavelength, 488 nm; emission wavelength, 505 nm), and Alexafluor 555-labeled CTxB with a HeNe laser (excitation wavelength 543 nm, emission wavelength 560 nm). For DAPI staining, a Coherent Mira 2-Photon laser tuned at 780 nm was used, and emission was collected with a BP 390–465 IR. Confocal reflectance images were obtained by reflecting excitation wavelengths to a confocal detector.

### Lipid Raft Isolation

Lipid rafts were isolated as previously described [5]. The sucrose gradient(s) containing rafts were identified by measuring raft markers Gαi (using anti-Gαi antibody, Oncogene Research Products, CedarLane Laboratories) by Western blotting, as previously described [5].

### Western Blotting

Whole cell and lipid raft protein lysates were prepared from cells as previously described [4]. Protein content was determined by bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Sigma). Equal amounts of protein (60 μg) from each treatment were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as previously described [4, 5]. Precision Plus Protein™ All blue (BioRad Laboratories Ltd., Mississauga, ON, Canada) molecular weight standards were used to monitor protein separation. Ponceau S staining was used to confirm transfer and even protein loading. Anti-Gα (i) (Cell Signaling Technology, New England Biolabs, ON, Canada) was used to identify rafts. Membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature in Tris-buffered saline plus Tween-20 (TBST: 0.01 M Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1 % v/v Tween-20) and 5 % w/v powdered milk. After rinsing with TBST, membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-CD95 or anti-FADD (Abcam) or anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers MA) as a loading control, diluted 1:10,000 in TBST containing 5 % BSA. A 1:2,500 dilution of the secondary antibody, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch Labs, Cedarlane Laboratories), or goat anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada) in TBST and 5 % w/v powdered milk was incubated with the membranes for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were developed using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL Plus™) western blotting detection reagents (Amersham Biosciences, GE Healthcare, Baie d’Urfe, QC, Canada) and read on a Typhoon™ Trio+ variable mode imager (Amersham Biosciences). The intensity of target bands was quantified using ImageQuant™ TL software (Amersham Biosciences).

### Flow Cytometry

Cells were treated as indicated, harvested with 0.5 % trypsin and suspended in 4 % FCS-PBS. After 30 min of incubation with anti-CD95 or isotype controls at 4 °C, cells were washed twice and resuspended in phosphate buffered saline containing paraformaldehyde (10 g/l plus Na azide) and analyzed on a FACScan (Becton–Dickinson, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) according to the relative fluorescence intensity using CellQuest software. Resulting percentages were corrected for background fluorescence (0–5 %) determined by incubating the cells with appropriate isotype placebos (IgG1).

### Statistical Analyses

All statistical analyses were carried out using SAS, version 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). For cell culture experiments, a minimum of three separate experiments were conducted. Data were tested for normal distribution and, once confirmed, analyzed by one-way or one-way repeated measures ANOVA, followed by post hoc analysis using Tukey’s test to identify significant (_P_ &lt; 0.05) differences among fatty acid and chemotherapy treatments.

## Results

### Cell Viability

Treatment with DHA (Fig. 1a), and to a lesser extent, EPA (Fig. 1b), significantly (_P_ &lt; 0.05) reduced cellular viability (assessed by using the WST-1 assay) of all cancer cell lines tested compared to either incubation with no fatty acids or a control fatty acid treatment of similar concentraton (data not shown). The cell viability of non-transformed breast epithelial cell line MCF-12A was not significantly affected by either fatty acid (Fig. 1a, b). In additional experiments it was confirmed that the decrease in the WST-1 assay was consistent with a decrease in cell number. Incubation of MCF-7 cells with EPA (100 μM) or DHA (60 μM), compared to cells incubated with a control fatty acid mixture (OLA/ALA) for 48 h resulted in reduced cell numbers by (52 ± 4 and 42 ± 4 %, respectively). For MDA-MB-231 cells, the same EPA and DHA concentration resulted in reduced cell counts by 59 ± 3 and 59 ± 4 %.


Cellular viability in response to n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid treatment in normal and transformed human breast cell lines. Viability was assessed in response to increasing concentrations of a DHA and b EPA. MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, SKBr-3 breast cancer cells and non-transformed MCF-12A cells were incubated for 72 h in the presence of varying concentrations of albumin-conjugated DHA or EPA. Viability was assessed using the WST-1 assay. Viability of transformed cells was significantly decreased with increasing concentrations of DHA and EPA (_P_ &lt; 0.05). The growth of non-malignant breast cells (MCF-12A) was not affected until concentrations ≥200 μM for DHA and 300 μM for EPA. For transformed cells, _n_ = 6–8 cell passages, for MCF-12A, _n_ = 3

### Interaction with Chemotherapeutic Agents

Pre-treatment with EPA at 100 μM and DHA at all concentrations tested (25, 50 and 100 μM) significantly reduced the growth of SKBr-3 cells but neither fatty acid increased the effect of Herceptin on tumor cell viability (Table 1). At 25 and 50 μM, EPA significantly reduced the viability of Herceptin-treated SKBr-3 cells compared with EPA treatment alone (_P_ = 0.03) Incubation with EPA at 100 μM and DHA at all concentrations tested (25, 50 and 100 μM) significantly reduced the growth of MCF-7 cells but pre-incubation with either fatty acid did not significantly change the effect of dox treatment on cell viability (Table 2). Incubation with EPA at 100 μM and DHA at all concentrations tested (30, 60, and 100 μM) significantly reduced the cell viability of MDA-MB-231 cells. Preincubation with EPA at 100 μM and DHA at &gt;60 μM increased the effect of dox on reducing the metabolic activity of MDA-MB-231 cells (Table 3). Based on the results in Table 3, EPA incubation for 48 h at 100 μM and DHA at 60 μM was used in all subsequent experiments. Cell counting experiments (_n_ = 3) were also performed in the MDA-MB-231 cell line to confirm that the decrease seen in the WST-1 assay was consistent with a decrease in the number of cells. Compared to pre-incubation with OLA/LNA (control), 48 h of treatment with DHA reduced cell numbers by 66 ± 1 % (_P_ &lt; 0.05). Pre-treating MDA-MD-2231 cells with control fatty acids for 48 h before dox (0.22 μg/ml for 24 h) resulted in reduced cell numbers (76 ± 6 %), while pre-treatment with DHA (50 μM) resulted in a significantly greater cell loss (45 ± 1 %, _P_ &lt; 0.05).


Effect of n-3 fatty acid incubation on the response to Herceptin in SKBr-3 cells  


Cells were incubated with the fatty acid treatment for 48 h. This was followed by a 24 h incubation) or without (−Herceptin) with (+Herceptin). Values are mean ± SEM (_n_ = 4 independent replications/treatment). Within a column, means that do not share a common superscript are significantly different (_P_ &lt; 0.05). The comparison of the cells treated with and without Herceptin is indicated in the column labeled comparison




Cells were incubated with the fatty acid treatment for 48 h. This was followed by a 24 h incubation without (−dox) or with (+dox). Values are means ± SEM (_n_ = 4 independent replications/treatment). Within a column, means that do not share a common superscript are significantly different (_P_ &lt; 0.05). The comparison of the cells treated with and without dox is indicated in the column labeled Comparison. All dead indicates that there were no cells left to measure




Cells were incubated with the fatty acid treatment for 48 h. This was followed by a 24 h incubation without (−dox) or with (+dox). Values are means ± SEM (_n_ = 4 independent replications/treatment). Within a column, means that do not share a common superscript are significantly different (_P_ &lt; 0.05). The comparison of the cells treated with and without dox is indicated in the column labeled comparison. All dead indicates that there were no cells left to measure

### CD95 Localization in Tumor Cells

Localization of CD95 was determined in MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 2a) and MCF-7 cells (Fig. 2b) by examining the overlay (D panels; yellow regions indicate areas of colocalization) of CD95 (A panels, green) with the lipid raft marker cholera toxin subunit B (B panels, red). Blue nuclei (C panels) are included to indicate the location of nuclei. Under control conditions (Box 1) and with dox treatment (Box 2), no colocalization of CD95 and cholera toxin subunit B was observed, indicating that CD95 is intracellular under these conditions. Membrane organization was disrupted in dox treated cells (Boxes 2B, 4B, 6B). There was also a suggestion of lipid raft clustering after incubation with DHA or EPA (panels 3D/5D and 4D/6D with and without dox in MDA-MB-231 cells. When DHA (Box 3) and DHA+dox (Box 4) were applied, CD95 co-localized with the lipid raft marker in both cell lines (panels 3D, 4D) after DHA treatment. This appeared more dramatic in MDA-MB-231 (Fig. 2a) cells than in MCF-7 cells (Fig. 2b). EPA (Box 5) and EPA+dox (Box 6) did not appear to induce CD95 translocation to the cell membrane.


Immunolocalization of CD95 in MDA-MB-231 (Fig. 3a) and MCF-7 cells (Fig. 3b). Cells were pretreated for 48 h with either no n -3 PUFA (_box 1, 2_) 60 μM DHA (_box 3, 4_) or 100 μM EPA (_box 5, 6_), followed by a 24 h treatment with dox (_boxes_ _2_, _4_ and _6_). CD95 was labeled with Alexafluor-488 conjugated antibody (_green_) and was intracellular under control conditions and upon treatment with dox. Membrane organization was disrupted in dox-treated cells, as indicated by the Alexa-fluor 555-conjugated lipid raft marker, cholera toxin subunit B (_red_). When DHA and DHA + dox were applied, CD95 appeared to co-localize with lipid rafts, observed in the _yellow portions_ of the overlay. To a lesser extent, EPA also induced CD95 translocation to lipid rafts. Stack size: 73 × 73 μm. Images are representative of the results of three separate experiments

### n-3 PUFA and Dox Effects on CD95 in MDA-MB-231 Cells

The surface expression (mean fluorescence) of CD95 increased with EPA, DHA or dox treatment (control treatment not shown in Fig. 3a). Treatment with DHA or dox increased CD95 surface expression significantly more than EPA (Fig. 3a, b). However, pre-treatment with DHA (Fig. 3a, b), but not EPA (Fig. 3a) before treatment with dox, resulted in a significantly greater (threefold increase) CD95 surface expression on MDA-MB-231 cells. The total amount of CD95 (Fig. 3c) or FADD (data not shown) in cells did not change with any of these treatments. However, both DHA and dox treatment increased the relative amount of CD95 (Fig. 3d), but not FADD (Fig. 3e) in membrane rafts compared to the control fatty acid treatment (statistics not illustrated on Fig. 3). Pre-treating cells with DHA resulted in significantly more CD95 (Fig. 3d) and FADD (Fig. 3e) in lipid rafts after dox treatment, compared to all the other treatments.


CD95 expression in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells exposed to DHA, EPA, with and without dox. a MDA-MB-231 cells were pretreated for 48 h with either 60 μM DHA or 100 μM EPA, followed by a 24 h treatment with or without dox (0.22 μg/ml). Cells were analyzed for CD95 surface expression by flow cytometry. Mean ± SEM (_n_ = 3) that do not share a common letter are significantly different (_P_ &lt; 0.05). b The shift in mean fluorescence in the flow cytometry analysis after treatment with a representative control fatty acid mixture (OLA + LNA), DHA or DHA followed by dox [as described in a]. c Cells were treated as in a, except CD95 analysis was carried out on whole-cell protein by Western blot and expressed as a percent of the band density of the control fatty acid treatment. There was no significant difference between groups [mean ± SEM (_n_ = 3)]. d Cells were treated with DHA, DHA + dox or dox as described in a. Lipid rafts were isolated and raft d CD95 and e FADD content was determined by Western blot and expressed as a percent of the band density of the control fatty acid treatment. Mean ± SEM (_n_ = 3) that do not share a common letter are significantly different (_P_ &lt; 0.05)

## Discussion

Consistent with previous studies [9, 30, 31], in the present study we demonstrated the growth-inhibitory effects of DHA and EPA on human breast cell cancers. Our studies demonstrate that DHA and EPA, even at high concentrations, do not affect the growth and metabolic activity of the non-transformed breast cell line MCF-12A. In the conditions in this study, DHA induced cell death at lower concentrations than EPA in all transformed cell lines. We also showed that DHA and EPA (albeit at higher concentrations) enhanced the efficacy of the chemotherapy drug, dox, in MDA-MB-231 cells. Lastly, we determined that at least a portion of the cytotoxic effect of DHA and its beneficial effects on the action of dox may be due to the movement of the CD95 (Fas) and FADD, two key proteins in DISC, into the lipid raft portion of the membrane in MDA-MB-231 cells.

### Effect of EPA and DHA on the Selective Effect on the Growth of Human Breast Cancer Cells

Long-chain n-3 PUFA have been shown to reduce the viability of breast cancer cells, both in vitro and in animal models [3, 12, 23, 32, 33]. Consistent with these observations, the current study demonstrates the dose-responsive cytotoxic properties of DHA and EPA on transformed breast cells, and is the first, to our knowledge, to confirm the lack of effect of these PUFA, even at high concentrations, on the growth/metabolism of non-transformed breast cells. This observation has the potential to be of clinical importance as most of the current therapies for malignant cells have negative effects on healthy cells. The concentration of DHA or EPA needed to induce anti-cancer effects in vivo is unknown, but our previous work has demonstrated that the concentrations selected in the current study for the drug experiments result in a fatty acid composition of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids [5] similar to concentrations reached in mammary tumor phospholipids when rodents are fed a high fish oil diet (EPA and DHA) [21].

A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the effects of n-3 PUFA on the growth and death of breast cancer cells [4, 34, 35]. Most hypothesized mechanisms involve the fatty acids being incorporated into the cell membrane. Previous work by our group [4] has demonstrated that DHA/EPA treatment of human breast cancer cells increases apoptosis and alters the composition of lipid rafts [5]. The FAS receptor, also known as CD95, is a receptor on the surface of cells that regulates apoptosis in cancer cells [36]. Upon activation, CD95 moves to lipid rafts in the plasma membrane [37]. Cancer cells have been demonstrated to under-express CD95 [29] and inducing expression is a mechanism by which many anticancer drugs work [27]. Incorporation of n-3 fatty acids alters other receptors in breast cancer cells [5] and DHA has been shown to induce caspase-8 activation [32], which is an early step in the CD95 pathway.

Using the immunofluorescent overlay of CD95 with cholera toxin subunit B; used to identify lipid rafts [38, 39], our data suggests that the anti-growth effects of DHA, and to a much lesser extent EPA, may in part be due to movement of CD95 to the raft. With fluorescent microscopy there was an indication of raft clustering after treatment with DHA in the MDA-MB-231 cells but not the MCF-7 which may have contributed to the effects on growth. Modified clustering of lipid rafts, and an increase in their size has been shown in response to DHA, but not EPA, in EL4 cells [40]. Further studies using the MDA-MB-231 cell line demonstrated that incubation with DHA resulted in increased surface expression of CD95 and increased CD95 in the membrane rafts; further supporting that DHA may mediate some of its cytotoxic effect on highly metastatic ER− tumor cells via activation of the death receptor complex on the cell surface. A recent nutrigenomic study investigating the effects of EPA on breast cancers differing in ER status concluded that the ER status of breast cancer cells may play a role in breast cancer cell response to treatments with n-3 and n-6 fatty acids [41]. In the present study, the similar rate of cytotoxicity (reduced metabolic activity) after treatment with DHA and EPA between the MDA-MB-231 cells (ER−) and the MCF-7 cells (ER+), suggest that ER status may not be the major mechanism by which n-3 PUFA act, at least in vitro. SKBr-3 cells over-express Her2, a growth receptor that is part of the epidermal growth receptor family. We have previously demonstrated that treatment with a mixture of DHA and EPA reduced the movement of the epidermal growth receptor into lipid rafts in MDA-MB-231 cells [5] suggesting a mechanism by which EPA and DHA inhibit the growth of SKBr-3 cells in the current study. This may also be the mechanism responsible for the increased cell death we observed in response to low concentrations of EPA (25 and 50 μM) and Herceptin. It is unclear why higher concentrations of EPA do not induce the same effects; further investigation of growth receptor expression and localization in response to EPA and Herceptin treatment is warranted.

To our knowledge, this is the first report of CD95 membrane co-localization in response to n-3 PUFA in breast cancer cells; but is consistent with what has been reported to occur in T-cells from fish oil-fed mice [42]. Conversely, a study of migration and metastasis in MDA-MB-231 cells reported that DHA treatment (at concentrations similar to those used in the current study) also alter the structure of lipid rafts, but described this disruption in a manner similar to what occurs after treatment with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin [43]. In the current study, we demonstrate that treatment with DHA (and to a lesser extent EPA) resulted in the movement of a key signaling molecules, CD95, to the membrane in two human breast cancer cell lines.

### Effect of Pre-treatment with EPA or DHA on Dox Sensitivity

Pre-treatment with either EPA or DHA did not significantly increase the cytotoxic effect of Herceptin or dox in SKBr-3 cells and MCF-7 (except perhaps when pre-treated with 100 μM DHA). However, for MDA-MB-231 cells there was a higher toxicity of dox when cells had been pre-treated with EPA (100 μM) or DHA (&gt;50 μM), suggesting a potential therapeutic benefit of providing this fatty acid prior to treatment with chemotherapy drugs. Vibet et al. [44] also observed that treating MCF-7 cells with DHA did not increase the sensitization to dox [44], which suggests that activity of the drug is not influenced by changes in membrane composition in this ER+ cell line. Our study is the first report, to our knowledge, examining the potential effect of n-3 fatty acids on the action of Herceptin, a mAb that blocks the binding to the Her2 receptor.

Pre-treatment with DHA and EPA (albeit at higher concentrations), significantly improved the anti-growth/metabolic effect of dox treatment on MDA-MB-231 cells. This was accompanied by a higher surface expression of CD95 (threefold) and content of CD95 (twofold) in the lipid raft fraction (twofold) over DHA or dox treatments alone. As we were unable to detect changes in total cellular CD95 protein, our results suggest that the combination of DHA and dox causes intracellular CD95 to move into the lipid rafts in the cell membrane. CD95 aggregation is known to result in the recruitment of FADD to the CD95 receptor in membrane rafts, forming the CD95-DISC, which activates the apoptotic cascade initiated by caspase-8 [27]. Consistent with the literature [28, 29], in the present study, dox treatment increases FADD content in the rafts. Our data extends this by demonstrating that pre-treatment with DHA increases (fourfold) the amount of FADD that moves into the raft.

Although identifying the mechanism to explain how pre-treatment with DHA increases the co-localization of CD95/FADD in the raft, it is logical to predict that this may occur via and increase in the DHA content of the rafts. We have previously reported that providing DHA (with EPA) significantly increases the content of DHA in plasma membrane rafts in MDA-MB-231 cells [5]. Similarly, we have fed DHA to rodents and produced changes in the DHA content of the rafts in immune cells that were similar to what would have occurred in the tumor cells in the current study. JCR:LA-cp rats fed a diet containing 28 g fish oil/kg diet enriched the lipid raft DHA concentration to approximately 1.0 ± 0.1 % of total fatty acids [45]. Treating MDA-MB-231 cells with 40 μM DHA yielded a raft DHA concentration of 2.6 ± 0.4 % (_n_ = 6) for total fatty acids (unpublished results).

A change in ceramide content in the cells could also contribute to the anti-cancer properties of DHA as DHA treatment results in a decreased sphingomyelin content and increased ceramide content in rafts from MDA-MB-231 cells [5]. A change in the cellular content of ceramide in tumors increases the content of CD95 and DISC in the membrane [46] and has been demonstrated to induce apoptosis [47]. Additionally, dox treatment has been reported to increases ceramide synthesis in tumor cells [48]. DHA treatment has also been demonstrated to facilitate the ability of dox to induce oxidative stress in tumor cells [44], supporting another membrane associated mechanism for improved sensitization.

Our findings are of potential clinical relevance as treatment with the anthracycline-based antibiotic, dox, is one of the drugs of choice for treatment of highly invasive metabolically active breast tumors, which are modeled by the MDA-MB-231 cell line [29, 49]. There is clinical evidence to support our findings. Breast cancer patients with higher concentrations of DHA in breast adipose tissue at the time of diagnosis were reported to respond more favorably to chemotherapy (i.e., had greater tumor regression) [23]. There is also preliminary evidence suggesting that treatment/feeding DHA might improve/prevent some of the side effects (both clinical and the development of drug resistance) of several chemotherapy drugs (reviewed by [9, 25]). In support of this, a phase II study examining effects of DHA supplementation on epirubicin (optical isomer of dox) efficacy in patients with highly metastatic breast cancer found DHA treatment was associated with improved survival [24].

In summary, our study provides evidence that pre-treatment with DHA prior to treatment with a commonly used breast cancer drug, can increase the anti-cancer effects of the drug in an ER−, highly invasive human breast tumor. Our data suggests that increased membrane raft localization and aggregation of CD95 and formation of DISC, an important signal of apoptosis, may be one of the mechanisms to explain this increased sensitivity. Future studies aimed at linking changes in the cell mediated by DHA pre-treatment will assist in understanding the potential role that DHA supplementation could have as adjuvant treatment for breast cancer.

### Acknowledgments

Study funding provided by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR). J. Ewaschuk was a recipient of a CIHR post-doctoral fellowship.

### Conflict of interest

