# Combined treatment with chrysin and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose synergistically inhibits LRP6 and Skp2 activation in triple-negative breast cancer and xenografts

### Abstract

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is difficult to treat because there is no targeted therapy available. Clinical studies have demonstrated that S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) are highly expressed in TNBC. Therefore, therapeutic strategies designed to downregulate LRP6 or Skp2 may play an important clinical role in the treatment of TNBC. However, the regulatory effects of many drugs on Skp2 and LRP6 expression are currently unknown. In the present study, combined treatment with chrysin and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG) synergistically induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest and inhibited cell proliferation and colony formation in AU565 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells. Furthermore, the combination of chrysin and 5GG suppressed tumor growth in nude mice with xenografted MDA-MB-231 cells by downregulating the phospho-LRP6 (pLRP6) and Skp2 proteins. Overall, our findings suggested that the combination of chrysin and 5GG has a potential therapeutic value in treating breast cancer, particularly for TNBC associated with Skp2/LRP6 overexpression, and hence warrants further investigation. (C) 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.






























### INTRODUCTION

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women. The prognosis and clinical management of patients with breast cancer are commonly determined by traditional clinicopathological factors, such as tumor size and grade, lymph node status, and the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). These breast cancer markers can be used to detect cancer and as targets for therapies. Targeted therapies with tamoxifen and trastuzumab are available for ER-positive and HER2-overexpressing breast tumors, respectively. However, no specific therapy has been identified for tumors that are both ER- and HER2-negative. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is defined as the absence of immunolabeling for ER, PR, and HER2. Recent clinical studies have shown a higher expression of S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-6 (LRP6) in patients with TNBC [1], indicating that Skp2 and LRP6 are breast cancer biomarkers and targets for breast cancer therapies [2, 3]. However, the regulatory effects of these drugs on Skp2 and LRP6 expression are currently unknown. Our previous study has demonstrated that 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG) attenuates Skp2 levels and induces cell growth arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells [4]. However, it is still unclear whether 5GG exerts an inhibitory effect on LRP6 expression in vitro and in vivo, and further studies are needed to better understand the precise molecular mechanisms by which 5GG alone or in combination with other phytochemicals regulate Skp2 and LRP6 expression in TNBC.

LRP6 is an essential Wnt coreceptor for activating the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Aberrant signaling activation is important for tumor formation. Wnt-1 was first identified as a proto-oncogene in mouse mammary gland tumors [5, 6], and the high expression of Wnt signaling has been observed during human breast cancer development. When Wnt binds to its cell-surface receptor Frizzled (Fzd), LRP5/6 coreceptors are recruited to form Wnt-Fzd-LRP5/6 ternary complexes. The Wnt-Fzd-LRP5/6 ternary complex then recruits Axin to the plasma membrane, leading to the stabilization of cytosolic β-catenin, which enters the nucleus and binds to the transcription factors of the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) to activate the transcription of Wnt target genes. Many studies have demonstrated that LRP6 is a novel target molecule for developing anticancer chemopreventive or therapeutic agents [3, 7]. Nevertheless, specific drugs that target LRP6 are currently unavailable. Therefore, it is important to explore whether commonly used chemopreventive agents can downregulate LRP6 expression.

Skp2 is a component of the Skp1-Cullin-1-F-box protein ubiquitin ligase complex. Studies have shown that mice lacking Skp2 have high levels of p27 and free cyclin E, suggesting a pivotal role for Skp2 in the degradation of p27 in vivo [8]. Skp2 is oncogenic and is overexpressed in breast cancer, particularly in patients with TNBC [1, 9]. Skp2 is a potential target gene of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in human invasive urinary bladder cancer cells [10]. The functional link between Wnt/β-catenin signaling and Skp2 is summarized below: Skp2 gene promoter sequence contains two TCF/LEF1 consensus binding sites, and the inhibition of Wnt signaling either by Wnt pathway inhibitors or TCF shRNA hinders the binding of the β-catenin/TCF/LEF1 complex to the Skp2 promoter and reduces Skp2 mRNA expression [10]. These features indicate that both LRP6 and Skp2 may be specific therapeutic targets in a subset of aggressive breast carcinomas.

Very few studies have shown that phytochemicals are potent inhibitors of LRP6, and little testing has been conducted on the effectiveness of phytochemicals in combination to treat TNBC. Chrysin and 5GG are important components in traditional crude Chinese drugs, and both induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in various human cancer cells [11, 12]. Although the anticancer activities of 5GG and chrysin have attracted attention, the detailed mechanisms of 5GG and chrysin in breast cancer prevention have not been fully deciphered. Research has indicated that chrysin and 5GG alone can effectively reduce human cancer cell proliferation and metastasis [13-15]. However, these studies did not examine whether the combination of chrysin and 5GG can exert synergistic effects against cancer cells. Thus, the aim of the present study was to investigate the LRP6- and Skp2-targeting effects of chrysin in combination with 5GG on TNBC in vitro and in vivo.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Cell Viability Assay

Cells were seeded at 2 × 104 cells/well in a 24-well plate with Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 24 h and then in DMEM containing 2% FBS with different drug concentrations for an additional 48-120 h. Cell viability was examined using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. In this assay, MTT, at a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL, was added to each well, and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. The supernatant was aspirated, and the MTT-formazan crystals formed by metabolically viable cells were dissolved in 500 µL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The absorbance of the oxidized MTT solution was determined in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay reader at a wavelength of 550 nm.

#### Morphological Features of Breast Cancer Cells

After incubation with 10 µM chrysin, 1-4 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 1-4 µM 5GG, the cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde. Morphological changes in the cells were examined by light microscopy.

#### Soft Agar Colony Formation Assay

Equal volumes of single-cell suspensions were treated with 10 µM chrysin, 1 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 1 µM 5GG dissolved in DMEM containing 20% FBS, and were then mixed with 0.7% agarose. The mixture was plated on 6 cm culture dishes on top of a base layer of 0.7% agarose containing 10% FBS and was allowed to solidify. After 21 d of incubation, colony formation was observed by light microscopy. Colonies &gt;50 µm were counted after the indicated incubation time.

#### Flow Cytometry

A flow cytometric analysis was performed as previously described [11]. Fluorescence emitted from the propidium iodide-DNA complex was quantified after the excitation of fluorescent dye by the FACScan cytometer.

#### Trypan Blue Exclusion Assay

The trypan blue dye exclusion assay was used to determine the cytotoxic effect of 10 µM chrysin, 1-4 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 1-4 µM 5GG on MDA-MB-231 cells. The cells were seeded in six-well plates at a density of 5 × 104 cells in DMEM containing 10% FBS for 24 h. The medium was changed, and the cells were incubated with or without the indicated concentrations of 10 µM chrysin, 1-4 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 1-4 µM 5GG for 48-96 h in DMEM containing 2% FBS. At the end of incubation, the cells were harvested by trypsinization. The cells were mixed well with trypan blue solution, and live cells without any dye stain inside were counted under a microscope using a hemocytometer. The number of cells was calculated using the number of control cells and were represented as a percentage of the control.

#### DNA Fragmentation

The cells were incubated with 10 µM chrysin, 1-4 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 1-4 µM 5GG for 72 h, washed with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline, and lysed in a lysis buffer (5 mM Tris buffer [pH 7.5], 10 mM EDTA, and 0.5% Triton X-100). Next, the cell lysates were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 15 min, and the supernatant was treated with 0.5 µg/mL RNase A for 1 h at 37°C and 0.5 mg/mL protease K at 55°C for another 2 h. DNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol and analyzed using 2% agarose gel electrophoresis.

#### Analysis of Nuclear Morphology

The cells were plated on coverslips placed in six-well plates. After treatment with 10 µM chrysin, 4 µM 5GG, or 10 µM chrysin plus 4 µM 5GG for 72 h, the cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde for 20 min and incubated in 4 mg/mL Hoechst 33258 for 30 min. The coverslips were washed and mounted in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and nuclear chromatin morphology was viewed under a microscope.

#### Western Blot Analysis

Total cellular proteins were prepared using Gold lysis buffer. Nuclear and cytosolic protein extracts were prepared according to the modified method of a previous study [16]. Western blot analysis was performed as previously described [11]. Immunoblots were developed with the enhanced chemiluminescent reagent (GE Healthcare Life Sciences).

#### Animals and Treatment

Female BALB/c nude mice (6-8 wk old) were purchased from the National Laboratory Animal Breeding and Research Center (Taipei, Taiwan). MDA-MB-231 cells (1 × 106) were subcutaneously implanted into the legs of the female nude mice. Tumors were allowed to develop to 100-200 mm3 before treatment. Tumor volumes were calculated using the following formula: 

The mice were then randomly divided into four groups (five mice per group) and treated with DMSO, chrysin (10 mg/kg/d), 5GG (5 mg/kg/d), or chrysin (10 mg/kg/d) plus 5GG (5 mg/kg/d) by intraperitoneal injection for 23 d. The mice were then euthanized, and the tumor tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde embedded in paraffin, and analyzed with hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) and immunohistochemical stainings. The mice were housed and maintained at the National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, and all experiments were conducted in compliance with the protocols and policies approved by the National Hsinchu University of Education, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

#### Statistical Analysis

All values were expressed as mean ± standard error (SE). Each value was the mean of at least three independent experiments in each group. Multiple group comparisons were performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett's multiple comparison test to assess statistical significance (_P_ &lt; 0.05; _P_ &lt; 0.01; _P_ &lt; 0.001).

### RESULTS

#### Growth Inhibitory Effect of Chrysin Alone, 5GG Alone, or in Combination With Other Compounds in MDA-MB-231 Cells

Previous studies have indicated that chrysin could effectively reduce TNBC cell proliferation and metastasis [17]. In addition, animal experiments have indicated a significant reduction in side effects caused by chrysin and doxorubicin co-treatment [18, 19]. Therefore, the growth inhibitory effects of chrysin combined with clinical drugs (paclitaxel, doxorubicin, rapamycin, tamoxifen, and 4-hydroxytamoxifen), flavones (luteolin and apigenin), flavonols (kaempferol and quercetin), a flavonol glycoside (rutin hydrate), a flavanone (naringin), a flavanol (catechin), and phenolic acids (curcumin, 5GG, tannic acid, gallic acid, epigallocatechin gallate, p-coumaric acid, chlorogenic acid, and syringic acid) were examined in MDA-MB-231 cells using the MTT assay and the combination index (CI). After 72 h of drug exposure, the calculated CI values for 10 µM chrysin plus 100 nM doxorubicin, 10 µM apigenin, 100 nM rapamycin, 10 µM kaempferol, 10 µM quercetin, 1 µM 5GG, and 10 µM tannic acid were consistently &lt;1, indicating synergism (Table 1). In contrast, co-treatment with 2 µM 5GG and 1 µM 4-hydroxytamoxifen, 10 µM chrysin, 10 µM apigenin, 10 µM kaempferol, and 10 µM quercetin for 72 h synergistically reduced the growth of MDA-MB-231 cells (Table 2). Thus, chrysin plus 10 µM apigenin, 10 µM kaempferol, 10 µM quercetin, 1 µM 5GG, and 10 µM tannic acid were selected for further analysis to determine the greatest synergistic effect on different types of cancer.  


#### Growth Inhibitory Effect of Chrysin Combined With Apigenin, Kaempferol, Quercetin, 5GG, or Tannic Acid on Breast Cancer (AU565, BT483, and MDA-MB-231 Cells), Liver Cancer (Hep G2 and Huh 7 Cells), and Embryonic Fibroblast Cells (NIH3T3 Cells)

The growth inhibitory effects of chrysin combined with apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin, 5GG, or tannic acid on breast cancer and liver cancer cells were evaluated using the MTT assay. As shown in Figure 1A, co-treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 1 µM 5GG for 48-120 h resulted in the greatest synergistic effect in MDA-MB-231 cells. Similar results were observed in AU565, BT483, Hep G2, and Huh 7 cells (Figure 1B). The morphological changes in MDA-MB-231 cells co-treated with 10 µM chrysin and different concentrations of 5GG for 72 h are illustrated in Figure 1C. The control cells were tightly attached not only to the culture plate but also to each other and formed a confluent layer of flat cells. In contrast, the morphology of MDA-MB-231 cells drastically changed after combined treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 1-4 µM 5GG but not after treatment with chrysin or 5GG alone.

Figure 1\. Effect of chrysin combined with apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin, 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG), or tannic acid on cell viability and morphology of MDA-MB-231 cells. (A) The cells were co-treated with 10 µM chrysin plus apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin, 5GG, or tannic acid of different concentrations for the indicated time periods, and cell viability was measured by the MTT assay. Data are the mean ± standard error of three independent experiments (co-treatment was more effective than treatment with either agent alone: _P_ &lt; 0.05; _P_ &lt; 0.01; _P_ &lt; 0.001 using ANOVA followed by Dunnett's multiple comparison test). (B) Effect of chrysin combined with apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin, 5GG, or tannic acid on proliferation of AU565, BT483, Hep G2, Huh 7, and NIH3T3 cells. (C) Morphological changes in the cells were induced by co-treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 1-4 µM 5GG for 72 h. The bar on the images represents 20 µm in length.


#### Combined Effect of Chrysin and 5GG on Anchorage-Independent Growth of MDA-MB-231 and AU565 Cells

To determine whether chrysin combined with 5GG affected the anchorage-independent proliferation potential, MDA-MB-231 and AU565 cells co-treated with chrysin and 5GG were plated on soft agar and were incubated for 21 d. Soft agar is used to separate cancer cells and to confirm whether the cells have cancerous characteristics. After 21 d of incubation, co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG synergistically reduced the capacity for soft agar colony formation with a smaller number of colonies formed, having reduced colony size (Figure 2).

Figure 2\. Combined effect of chrysin and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG) on anchorage-independent growth of MDA-MB-231 and AU565 breast cancer cells. The effects of co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG on colony formation of MDA-MB-231 and AU565 cells were determined using the soft agar colony formation assay. The cells were co-treated with chrysin and 5GG of different concentrations in 0.35% agarose containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) over 0.7% agarose containing 10% FCS. Cell colonies were observed under light microscopy after a 21 d incubation period at 37°C in 5% CO2. The bar on the images represents 100 µm in length. Colonies &gt;50 µm were counted after the incubation period. Data are the mean ± standard error of three independent experiments.


#### Combination of Chrysin and 5GG Synergistically Induced Cell Cycle Arrest and Apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 and AU565 Cells

In order to study the mechanisms underlying the synergy between chrysin and 5GG in the growth inhibition of breast cancer cells, cell cycle analyses were performed on MDA-MB-231 and AU565 cells 72 and 96 h after drug exposure, using the flow cytometric analysis of cellular DNA content. Co-treatment of MDA-MB 231 cells with 10 µM chrysin and 1-4 µM 5GG resulted in a significantly higher percentage of cells in the sub-G1 phase at 72-96 h, compared with treatment using either of the two agents alone (Figure 3A). Unlike MDA-MB 231 cells, AU565 cells co-treated with 10 µM chrysin and 1-4 µM 5GG showed a much greater G1 phase accumulation at 72 h and G2/M phase accumulation at 96 h, compared with those treated with either agent alone at the same concentrations (Figure 3B). These results demonstrate that chrysin plus 5GG synergistically act to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in both these breast cancer cell types.

Figure 3\. Changes in cell cycle phase distribution following co-treatment with chrysin and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG). (A) MDA-MB-231 and (B) AU565 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum for 24 h. After incubating for 24 h, the cells were treated with chrysin alone, 5GG alone or were co-treated with both chrysin and 5GG for 72-96 h. The cells were harvested and stained with propidium iodide, and the cell cycle distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry.


Next, the cytotoxic effect of chrysin combined with 5GG on the induction of apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells was determined using the trypan blue dye exclusion assay. MDA-MB-231 cell death induced by co-treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 4 µM 5GG was enhanced by 38.6% at 48 h, 49.1% at 72 h, and 79.2% at 96 h compared with those induced by chrysin or 5GG alone (Figure 4A). The induction of apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells following chrysin and 5GG co-treatment was further confirmed by DNA fragmentation and Hoechst assays. Treating MDA-MB-231 cells with 10 µM chrysin or 1-2 µM 5GG alone for 72 h did not induce DNA fragmentation. However, co-treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 1-2 µM 5GG induced dose-dependent DNA fragmentation (Figure 4B). Although a high concentration of 5GG (4 µM) triggered DNA fragmentation, co-treatment with 10 µM chrysin and 4 µM 5GG resulted in synergistically enhanced DNA fragmentation. Similar to the DNA fragmentation assay, the control cells showed round and homogeneous nuclei, whereas cells co-treated with 10 µM chrysin and 4 µM 5GG showed condensed and fragmented nuclei in the Hoechst assay (Figure 4C). Overall, these results suggest that chrysin and 5GG act synergistically to induce cell death and DNA fragmentation in MDA-MB-231 cells.

Figure 4\. Cytotoxic effect of combined treatment with chrysin and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG) on induction of apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells. Cytotoxic effects in breast cancer cells co-treated with chrysin and 5GG were examined using trypan blue dye exclusion assay (A) and DNA fragmentation assay (B). (C) Effect of chrysin plus 5GG on nuclear chromatin morphology in MDA-MB-231 cells. Cells were co-treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chrysin, 5GG, and chrysin plus 5GG for 72 h and stained with Hoechst 33258. The morphological changes in the nuclear chromatin were viewed under a fluorescence microscope. The bar in the images represents 10 µm in length. (D) Effects of dose and time following co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG for 48-96 h on LRP6, p-LRP6, Axin-2, β-catenin, and Skp2 expression levels in MDA-MB-231 cells. (E) Effects on the activated β-catenin protein in the nucleus following co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG for 72 h. (F) MDA-MB-231 cells grown on coverslips were treated with DMSO, chrysin, 5GG, and chrysin plus 5GG, respectively for 72 h. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with β-catenin antibody, followed by fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated secondary antibody (_green_) and Hoechst 33258 (_blue_). Subcellular distribution was analyzed by confocal microscopy. (G) Effects of treatment dose with chrysin plus 5GG for 72 h on cyclin A, cyclin D, caspase 3, and caspase 8 expression levels in MDA-MB-231 cells. Total cell lysates and nuclear and cytosolic protein extracts were subjected to Western blot analysis. (H) Effects of co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG on the viability of MDA-MB-231 cells with or without pretreatment with Z-VAD-FMK caspase inhibitor. Cell viability was measured by the MTT assay. Data are mean ± standard error of three independent experiments.


#### Combined Effect of Chrysin and 5GG in Modulating the Expression Levels of LRP 6 and Skp2 in MDA-MB-231 Breast Cancer Cells

Both the Wnt/Fzd/LRP and Skp2 signaling pathways are important for cell cycle progression in TNBC cells [2, 3]. To identify the underlying molecular mechanism of the synergy between chrysin and 5GG, a Western blotting analysis was carried out to profile the expression of LRP6 and Skp2 in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with a single agent or with combination therapy. Figure 4D shows that chrysin and 5GG alone or in combination decreased p-LRP6, LRP6, Axin-2, and Skp2 synergistically in MDA-MB-231 cells. Although co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG did not decrease β-catenin protein expression, it synergistically reduces the nuclear translocation of β-catenin (Figure 4E). The inhibition of β-catenin signaling following co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG in MDA-MB-231 cells was further confirmed by immunofluorescence staining. Immunofluorescence staining showed that the β-catenin protein was mainly expressed in the nuclei of MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG synergistically decreased the nuclear localization of β-catenin (Figure 4F). These results show that the synergistic action of the combination of chrysin and 5GG induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells because of their synergistic action of downregulating LRP6 and Skp2. Studies have shown that the downregulation of LRP6 or Skp2 induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells [20]. Western blot analysis was used to detect the protein expression levels of cleaved caspase 3 and cleaved caspase 8 in MDA-MB-231 cells co-treated with various doses of 5GG and 10 µM chrysin for 72 h. Cyclin A, cyclin D, full-length caspase 3, and full-length caspase 8 protein expression levels decreased in MDA-MB-231 cells co-treated with 5GG and chrysin, whereas the levels of cleaved caspase 3 and cleaved caspase 8 increased (Figure 4G). Furthermore, we examined whether apoptosis induced by co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG was mediated by a caspase-dependent mechanism. As shown in Figure 4H, pretreating MDA-MB-231 cells with the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK did not block synergistic apoptosis induced by the combination of chrysin and 5GG. These results suggest that chrysin combined with 5GG synergistically induced apoptosis through both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent mechanisms in MDA-MB-231 cells.

#### Combination of Chrysin and 5GG Synergistically Inhibited Tumor Growth in an MDA-MB-231 Cell Xenografted Nude Mice Model

To determine whether chrysin combined with 5GG synergistically inhibits breast cancer cell growth in vivo, MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells were xenografted into the leg skin of BALB/c nude mice, and the antiproliferative or cytotoxic effects of chrysin, 5GG, or chrysin plus 5GG in nude mice containing MDA-MB-231 cells were investigated. As shown in Figure 5A and B, mean tumor volumes and weights in the chrysin plus 5GG group on day 23 were lower than those of the group treated with either of the two agents alone. Representative H&amp;E staining and immunohistochemical photographs of p-LRP6 and Skp2 are shown in Figure 5C. H&amp;E staining shows nuclear features including nuclear atypia and the nuclear/cytoplasmic (_N_/_C_) ratio. Nuclear atypia and the _N_/_C_ ratio were of a lower grade in the tumors of mice co-treated with chrysin and 5GG than those in the control group or the group treated with either agent alone. Therefore, tumor cell proliferation was limited after co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG, indicating a reduction in tumor growth. In addition, immunohistochemical staining with p-LRP6 and Skp2 antibodies revealed a lower expression of p-LRP6 and Skp2 in the tumors of mice co-treated with chrysin and 5GG compared with the mice treated with either agent alone. Furthermore, p-LRP6, LRP6, Skp2, Axin-2, β-catenin, survivin, bcl-xL, and caspase 3 expression levels in drug-treated and DMSO-treated control mice were examined. p-LRP6, LRP6, Skp2, and Axin-2 expression levels decreased in the chrysin plus 5GG group compared with those in the chrysin or 5GG groups alone and the control group (Figure 5D). No significant changes were found in the relative organ weights of the heart, liver, spleen, or kidney in the chrysin, 5GG, or chrysin plus 5GG groups when compared with those in the DMSO-treated control group (data not shown). Serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and creatinine values were measured to evaluate side effects caused by chrysin and 5GG. No significant differences in AST and creatinine levels were found between the drug-treated and DMSO-treated control groups (data not shown). These results suggest that co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG inhibited tumor growth and promoted the downregulation of LRP6 and Skp2 levels in vivo.

Figure 5\. Effects of chrysin combined with 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-β-D-glucose (5GG) on tumor growth in nude mice with xenografted MDAMB-231 cells. The cells were subcutaneously implanted into the legs of female nude mice to induce tumor xenografts. Four groups were intraperitoneally injected with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), chrysin (10 mg/kg/d), 5GG (5 mg/kg/d), or chrysin (10 mg/kg/d) plus 5GG (5 mg/kg/d) for 23 d, and tumor volumes (A) and tumor weights (B) were determined. (C) Tumor morphology in the nude mice with xenografted MDAMB-231 cells was examined by hematoxylin and eosin staining (original magnification, 200×). The immunohistochemical analysis of p-LRP6 and Skp2 in the tumors of mice treated with DMSO, chrysin, 5GG, or chrysin plus 5GG. The bar in the images represents 50 µm in length. (D) Western blot analysis of p-LRP6, LRP6, Axin-2, β-catenin, Skp2, survivin, Bcl-xl, and caspase 3 in the tumors of mice treated with DMSO, chrysin, 5GG, or chrysin plus 5GG.


### DISCUSSION

TNBC is difficult to treat because no targeted therapy is presently available. Several studies have demonstrated that Skp2 and LRP6 are upregulated in TNBC [2, 3]. Skp2, which acts as an oncoprotein by targeting p27 for degradation, is overexpressed in breast cancer and has been associated with a shorter disease-free survival in patients with breast cancer [21]. Signoretti et al. [1] demonstrated that Skp2 is highly expressed in 60% of ER-negative tumors. Chan et al. [22] reported that upregulation of Skp2 is strongly correlated with activation of Akt and promotion of tumor progression in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer. Thus, Skp2 can contribute to identifying prognostic biomarkers that can aid in developing targeted therapeutic strategies for TNBC, ER/HER2-negative, or HER2-positive breast cancer. LRP6, which acts as an activator of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, is also overexpressed in ER/HER2-negative breast cancer, and knockdown of LRP6, but not LRP5, with siRNA is sufficient to inhibit breast tumorigenesis and carcinogenesis [3]. Therefore, LRP6 is a potential therapeutic target for ER/HER2-negative breast cancer or TNBC. Recent studies have demonstrated that Skp2 is a potential target of the Wnt/β-catenin-regulated G1-S transition in human cancer [10]. However, there is no effective treatment for breast cancer that overexpresses both Skp2 and LRP6, so the search for a drug that specifically targets Skp2 and LRP6 is an important area of research. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the synergistic effect of chrysin and 5GG in reducing LRP6 and Skp2 expression and showing excellent antitumor activity in MDA-MB-231 cells in vivo and in vitro. Our results suggest that chrysin combined with 5GG would be extremely effective for developing potent antibreast cancer agents, which could pharmacologically target both LRP6 and Skp2.

The aberrant activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, as defined by β-catenin nuclear expression, is detected in 40-60% of breast cancers, and the accumulation of nuclear β-catenin is found in 60% of human breast cancers [23]. Additionally, LRP6 is significantly upregulated in 20-36% of human breast carcinomas [3]. Thus, the Wnt/LRP6/β-catenin signaling pathway plays an important role in breast cancer development. Recently discovered β-catenin target genes, such as cyclin D1, c-myc, and Skp2, are all associated with a poorer prognoses in breast cancer patients. These studies suggest that targeting the Wnt signaling pathway could serves as a therapeutic strategy for breast cancer. Notably, our results illustrate that chrysin combined with 5GG decreased the nuclear translocation and the activation of β-catenin. Furthermore, co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG synergistically decreased cyclin D1, cyclin A, LRP6, p-LRP6, Axin-2, and Skp2 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 4). Similar results have been reported in more recent studies. Lu et al. reported that silibinin, niclosamide, and rottlerin inhibit breast and prostate cancer cell proliferation by downregulating LRP6 [7, 24, 25].

Many studies have shown that Dickkopf, wise, connective tissue growth factor, and sclerostin are high-affinity LRP6 ligands that inhibit the Wnt signaling pathway [26-28]. Therefore, it is important to understand whether the accumulation of other known Wnt signaling pathway inhibitors may also contribute to apoptosis and growth inhibition induced by downregulating LRP6. Moreover, the actual role of LRP6 in apoptosis and growth inhibition remains unclear and merits further research. LRP6 is overexpressed not only in breast cancer cells but also in prostate, liver, and colon cancer cells. Chrysin and 5GG have been shown to reduce proliferation and induce apoptosis in human prostate, liver, and colon cancer cells [29]. In this study, we found that co-treatment with chrysin and 5GG was able to synergistically decrease the growth of liver cancer cells (Hep G2 and Huh 7). However, the mechanism involved in chrysin- and 5GG-induced prostate, liver, and colon cancer cell death is not fully understood. The issue of whether Wnt/LRP6/β-catenin is a direct target for chrysin or 5GG in prostate, liver, and colon cancer cells remains to be elucidated.

Several clinical studies have used natural dietary compounds containing a mixture of various phytochemicals to prevent human cancer. Therefore, it is important to investigate their combined effects in vivo and in vitro. Our previous study has shown that 5GG combined with quercetin, kaempferol, or apigenin has a beneficial synergistic effect on breast cancer cells [11]. Another important finding of this study is that combining chrysin with different phytochemicals such as quercetin, kaempferol, and apigenin synergistically decreased the proliferation of MDA-MB-231, AU565, BT483, and Huh 7 cells. However, the molecular mechanism of this action is largely unknown and the current findings have to be validated by in vivo studies. Additionally, the overexpression of LRP6 has been shown to enhance tumor cell formation and proliferation in cell cultures and nude mice as well as colony formation efficiency in soft agar [30]. The present study found that combined treatment with chrysin and 5GG synergistically inhibited LRP6 activation, colony formation, and tumor cell growth in MDA-MB-231 cells and nude mice with xenografted MDA-MB-231 cells.

In conclusion, the combination of chrysin and 5GG synergistically decreases breast cancer cell growth in vivo and in vitro by downregulating LRP6 and Skp2. Therefore, the combination of chrysin and 5GG shows potential for the development of potent agents that can pharmacologically target LRP6 and Skp2 in TNBC.
