# Comparative In Vivo Evaluations of Curcumin and Its Analog Difluorinated Curcumin Against Cisplatin-Induced Nephrotoxicity

## Abstract

Curcumin, a polyphenol, has pharmacological effects including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer features. In this study, we have performed comparative in vivo evaluations of CDF (curcumin difluorinated) and curcumin in cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Male Wistar rats were divided into four groups: (1) Control; (2) Cisplatin (7 mg/kg body wt, intraperitoneal as a single dose); (3) Cisplatin and CDF (50 mg/rat/day; for 12 days); (4) Cisplatin and curcumin (50 mg/rat/day), for 12 days). Cisplatin treated rats exhibited kidney injury manifested by increased serum N-urea and creatinine (_P &lt;_ 0.001). Kidney from cisplatin treated rats also exhibited significant increase in malondialdehyde (MDA) and 8-isoprostane levels (_P &lt;_ 0.001). Treatment with CDF and curcumin prevented the rise in serum N-urea, creatinine, MDA and 8-isoprostane as compared to experimental control group in kidney (_P &lt;_ 0.05). Compared to curcumin, CDF had greater potential in suppressing cisplatin-induced pro-inflammatory factors NF-κB and COX-2 as well as downstream markers Nrf2 and HO-1 (_P_ &lt; 0.05) in kidney. The analysis on anion transport markers (OAT1 and OAT3) showed a similar trend (CDF &gt; curcumin). CDF could reduce the expression of multi-drug resistance markers OCT1, OCT2, MRP2 and MRP4 to a much greater extent than curcumin (_P_ &lt; 0.05). We also demonstrate that CDF influenced the expression of p-mTOR, p-p70S6K1, p-4E-BP1 and p-Akt. These data suggest that CDF can potentially be used to reduce the chemotherapy induced nephrotoxicity thereby enhancing the therapeutic window of cisplatin. The results also proved that compared to curcumin, CDF has superior protective effect in nephrotoxicity.

### Keywords


An erratum to this article can be found at http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12011-014-0198-y.

## Introduction

Cisplatin (_cis_-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)), an alkylating-like agent, is a well-known DNA intercalating chemotherapy drug that is widely used for the treatment of different cancers [1]. However, its clinical utility is limited due to the observed genotoxic side effects on healthy cells suggesting that combination regimens involving geno-protective agents are urgently needed for the management of cisplatin chemotherapy [2]. In this direction, non-toxic natural agents (diet and diet derived compounds) have been well studied for their cytoprotective effects, and in ameliorating toxic side effects of cisplatin [3]. A number of studies have shown that agents like curcumin (from _Curcuma longa_) can sensitize cancer cells to the cytotoxic action of chemotherapy thereby reducing the dosage associated toxicities [4–6]. Based on its beneficial effects, curcumin has tested in Phase II clinical trials either as single agent [7] or in combination with cytotoxic therapy [8]. Nevertheless, the low bioavailability associated to curcumin reduces its clinical utility [9]. Therefore, there is drive to develop novel analogs of curcumin that retain the multi-targeted effects yet have superior bioavailability and half-life in in vivo system [10].

CDF (curcumin difluorinated) is a difluoro analog developed in our lab by introduction of two fluorides at the meta position of curcumin [11]. Earlier, we have characterized the growth inhibitory and apoptotic potential of CDF against different tumors such as pancreatic [12–15], colon [16], breast [17] and prostate [18]. Unlike curcumin that works in micro molar range, CDF has almost 10-fold lower IC50s (≤250 nM in most solid tumors). Many different mechanisms have been attributed to the observed efficacy of CDF against a wide variety of tumor types. In PC, CDF induced growth inhibition and apoptosis was found to be mediated through down-regulation of microRNA (miR)-21 (miR-21), PTEN and up-regulation of miR-200 [19]. In a colon cancer stem-like cell model with functional p53 (wt-p53), CDF-induced apoptosis was associated with down-regulation of the membrane transporter ABCG2 and attenuation of EGFR, IGF-1R, and NF-κB signaling, which was also consistent with inactivation of β-catenin, COX-2, Bcl-xL and activation of the pro-apoptotic Bax [16]. Additionally, in a castrate resistant aggressive prostate cancer cell line model, CDF inhibited the signal transduction in the androgen receptor (AR) TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene wnt signaling (AR/TMPRSS2-ERG/Wnt) network, leading to the inactivation of Wnt signaling, which was consistent with inhibition of cell invasion [18]. These multiple studies solidify the different anticancer mechanisms of CDF alone in combination with chemotherapeutic agents. However, its role as a protective agent against chemotherapy induced toxicity has not been investigated and serves as the topic of this paper. In the present report, we have performed comparative in vivo evaluations of CDF and parent curcumin for their protective effects against cisplatin-induced toxicity in a rat model. Our findings reveal that in general CDF has superior protective effects compared to curcumin and in view of its biologically relevant pharmacokinetic parameters warrant further clinical investigations.

## Materials and Methods

### Chemicals

CDF was developed in our laboratory as described previously [11]. Antibodies for NF-κB, COX-2, Nrf2, HO-1, OCT1, OCT3, OAT1, OAT2, MRP2, MRP4, p-mTOR, p70S6K1, p-4E-BP1 and p-Akt were obtained from Abcam (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). β-Actin (loading control) and secondary antibodies were purchased from Abcam.

### Animals

Wistar albino rats (male, _n_ = 28, 8 weeks old), weighing between 180 ± 20 g, were obtained from Veterinary Control Institute (Elazig, Turkey) and were acclimatized to the animal facility for a week on standard rat chow and allowed water ad libitum under controlled conditions of 22 ± 2 °C temperature, 50 ± 15 % relative humidity and normal photoperiod (12 h dark and 12 h light). The protocol of this study was approved by Institutional Animal Ethical Committee of Veterinary Control Institute.

### Experimental Design

For induction of nephrotoxicity, cisplatin (Sigma, USA) was administered (7 mg/kg body wt) by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection as a single dose [20]. Rats were randomly divided into four groups with seven animals in each and treated as follows: (1) control rats, treated with isotonic saline (intraperitoneal [i.p.]); (2) Cisplatin (7 mg/kg bw, i.p., as a single dose); (3) Cisplatin and CDF (50 mg/rat/day; intragastric once daily for 12 days); (4) Cisplatin and curcumin (50 mg/rat/day, intragastric once daily for 12 days). After 2 days of CDF and curcumin treatment at a dose of 50 mg/rat/day intragastric once daily, rats were treated with a single i.p. injection of cisplatin (7 mg/kg bw). The dose of CDF and curcumin was selected based on preliminary and published data [15]. On day 12 (10 days after the cisplatin treatment), all rats were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Blood samples taken and the kidneys of the animals removed and kept at −80 °C until the analysis. Blood samples were centrifuged at 3,000×_g_ for 10 min and sera were collected.

### Laboratory Analyses

Serum N-urea and creatinine were measured using biochemical analyzer (Olympus AU-660; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Lipid peroxidation was measured in terms of malondialdehyde (MDA) formation, which is the major product of membrane lipid peroxidation done by the method of Karatepe et al., [21] with slight modification. MDA concentration of kidney tissue was measured by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan) using Shimadzu UV–vis SPD-10 AVP detector and C18- ODS-3, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm column. The mobile phase was 30 mM KH2PO4-methanol (82.5 + 17.5, v/v %, pH 3.6) and the flow rate was 1.2 ml min−1. Chromatograms were monitored at 250 nm and injection volume was 20 μl. The homogenized kidney tissue (in PBS) was purified in the presence of 0.01 % butylated hydroxytoluene and then processed for analysis of 8-isoprostane as previously described by Wong et al. [22] and determined using ELISA kits (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) according to the manufacturers’ protocols.

### Rat Kidney Protein Isolation and Western Blot Analysis

Rat kidneys from control, cisplatin, curcumin + cisplatin and curcumin + CDF were excised at the end of the treatment period. Kidneys were minced using a sharp surgical blade and homogenized in a glass homogenizer. Protein was isolated using our previously published methods [23]. Isolated proteins were subjected to BCA (Pierce) protein estimation and equal amount of sample resolved using SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis according to our published methods [24]. Lamin B and β-actin were used as loading controls for nuclear and whole cell proteins, respectively.

### Statistical Analysis

Data are given as mean ± SEM. Sample size was calculated based on a power of 85 % and a _P_ value of 0.05. Given that assumption, a sample size of seven per treatment was calculated. The data were analyzed using the GLM procedure of SAS (SAS Institute; SAS User’s Guide: Statistics). The treatments were compared using ANOVA and student's unpaired _t_ test; _P_ &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Between group differences in latencies were analyzed by the analysis of variance for repeated measurements (ANOVAR) followed by Fisher's post hoc test for all groups.

## Results

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on Markers of Renal Function

Results for renal function tests are depicted in Table 1. Nephrotoxicity was demonstrated by significant increases in serum N-urea levels (from ~51 to 431 mg/dl) in the cisplatin group (_P_ &lt; 0.001). Both CDF and curcumin decreased the serum N-urea and creatinine levels, but CDF was more effective (_P_ &lt; 0.05). Also, there were significant increases in serum creatinine levels in the cisplatin group compared to the control group (_P_ &lt; 0.001). However, differences in creatinine levels were found to be statistically significant among each of these groups. CDF and curcumin administration prevented the increase of creatinine levels (Table 1).


The effect of CDF and curcumin administration on N-urea and creatinine levels in serum of experimental rats (_n_ = 7)  


Values are mean ± SE of seven rats from each group. Superscripts (a, b, c, d) indicate that means in the same line without a common superscript differ significantly (_P_ &lt; 0.05). Numbers in parentheses are changes relative to the control.

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on Biomarkers of Oxidative Stress

Table 2 shows the alternations in the indicators of oxidative stress, namely MDA and 8-isoprostane levels, in kidney tissues of both normal and cisplatin-treated rats. Treatment of normal animals with CDF or curcumin did not affect lipid peroxidation levels in the kidney tissues (_P_ &gt; 0.05). Cisplatin as single agent induced ~3-fold increase in the levels of MDA (from ~73 to ~182 nmol/g) (_P_ &lt; 0.001). Interestingly, treatment with CDF substantially reduced MDA levels (~103 nmol/g) (_P_ &lt; 0.01). Curcumin also showed reduction in serum MDA; however, it was less effective than CDF (Table 2; _P &lt;_ 0.05). The levels of 8-isoprostane were reduced significantly in CDF and curcumin treated rats when compared to cisplatin (~960 pg/g in CDF and ~1,252 pg/g in curcumin when compared to ~1,760 pg/g is cisplatin-treated group) (Table 2; _P_ &lt; 0.001).


The effect of CDF and curcumin on levels of MDA and 8-isoprostane in kidney of rats (_n_ = 7)  


Values are mean ± SE of seven rats from each group. Superscripts (a, b, c, d) indicate that means in the same line without a common superscript differ significantly (_P_ &lt; 0.05). Numbers in _parentheses_ are changes relative to the control

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on NF-κB, COX-2, Nrf2 and HO-1 Pathways

The level of renal nuclear NF-κB p65 (Fig. 1a) and COX (Fig. 1d) was determined by Western blot. The expression of NF-κB and COX in kidney was increased after cisplatin treatment compared with the expression in the control (_P_ &lt; 0.001). The increased NF-κB and COX-2 expressions in kidney after cisplatin treatment were decreased by the CDF or curcumin treatment (_P_ &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 1a,b). As shown in Fig. 1, Western blot analysis showed that the accumulation of Nrf2 in the nuclear fraction and HO-1 was significantly lower in the kidney of cisplatin-treated rats than that of the control rats (_P_ &lt; 0.001). The Nrf2 accumulation in the nuclear fraction of kidney was significantly increased by treatment with CDF or curcumin in cisplatin-treated rats, as compared with cisplatin treatment alone (_P_ &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 1c). HO-1 expression of the cisplatin-induced kidney injury group was lower than that of control (_P_ &lt; 0.001). The level of HO-1 expression in the cisplatin-induced kidney injury group was lower than that of the CDF or curcumin-treated group (_P_ &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 1d). Curcumin showed lesser potency than CDF in reversing the levels of these proteins.


Effect of CDF and curcumin on NF-κB p65 (a), COX-2 (b), Nrf2 (c), and HO-1 (d) expressions in rats with cisplatin-induced kidney injury. The intensity of the bands was quantified by densitometric analysis. Data are expressed as a ratio of normal control value (set to 100 %). The bar represents the standard error of the mean. Blots were repeated at least three times (_n_ = 3) and a representative blot is shown. β-Actin was included to ensure equal protein loading. a–d Means on the bars with no common superscript differ significantly at the level of _P_ &lt; 0.05 by Fisher's multiple comparison test. _Bars with no common superscript_ differ significantly at the level of _P_ &lt; 0.05 by Fisher's multiple comparison test

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on Organic Anion and Cation Transporters

Western blots analysis of OATs and OCTs was conducted to determine the effect of CDF and curcumin on organic anion and cation transporter protein levels. Representative blots are shown in Fig. 2. Densitometric analysis indicated that administration of cisplatin markedly decreased the expression of OAT1 and OAT3 in the kidney (Fig. 2, _P &lt;_ 0.001). However, CDF or curcumin reversed this effect and the expression of OAT1 (Fig. 2a) and OAT3 (Fig. 2b) was increased in kidney from animals treated with cisplatin and CDF or curcumin (_P_ &lt; 0.05) (CDF &gt; curcumin). Cisplatin-treated animals exhibited significant (_P_ &lt; 0.001) decrease in the levels of OCT1 (Fig. 2c) and OCT2 (Fig. 2d) compared to control animals. However, in the CDF or curcumin treatment groups we observed a significant recovery in the levels of both these proteins (CDF &gt; curcumin) (_P_ &lt; 0.05).


Effect of CDF and curcumin on the OAT1 (a), OAT3 (b), OCT1 (c), OCT3 (d), MRP2 (e), and MRP4 (f) expressions in rats with cisplatin-induced kidney injury. The intensity of the bands was quantified by densitometric analysis. Data are expressed as a ratio of normal control value (set to 100 %). The _bar_ represents the standard error of the mean. Blots were repeated at least three times (_n_ = 3) and a representative blot is shown. β-Actin was included to ensure equal protein loading. a–d Means on the bars with no common superscript differ significantly at the level of _P_ &lt; 0.05 by Fisher's multiple comparison test

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on Multi-Drug Resistance Proteins

As shown in Fig. 2, multi-drug resistance proteins levels, MRP2 and MRP4, in the kidney of cisplatin-treated group of rats were significantly higher than the control group (_P_ &lt; 0.05). In contrast, CDF and curcumin treatment decreased the levels of MRP2 (Fig. 2e) and MRP4 (Fig. 2f) significantly when compared to the cisplatin treated rats (_P_ &lt; 0_._05). CDF showed better efficacy compared to curcumin is reversing the expression of MDR proteins.

### Effects of CDF and Curcumin on mTOR Pathway

Figure 3 shows the effect of CDF/curcumin on expression of p-mTOR and downstream effector pathways. Cisplatin-treated animals exhibited significant (_P_ &lt; 0.001) increase in kidney p-mTOR, p70S6K1 (Fig. 3b), p-4E-BP1 (Fig. 3c) and p-Akt (Fig. 3d) activities as compared to control animals. Compared to cisplatin-treated animals, animals treated with CDF and curcumin along with cisplatin (combination group) revealed significant amelioration of cisplatin effects (Fig. 3). In all cases, CDF showed superior inhibition of mTOR pathway when compared to curcumin.


Effect of CDF and curcumin on the p-mTOR (a), p70S6K1 (b), p-4E-BP1 (c) and p-Akt (d) expressions in rats with cisplatin-induced kidney injury. The intensity of the bands was quantified by densitometric analysis. Data are expressed as a ratio of normal control value (set to 100 %). The _bar_ represents the standard error of the mean. Blots were repeated at least three times (_n_ = 3) and a representative blot is shown. β-Actin was included to ensure equal protein loading. a–d Means on the bars with no common superscript differ significantly at the level of _P_ &lt; .05 by Fisher's multiple comparison test

## Discussion

This is the first report to compare the protective effect of the novel agent CDF with curcumin on cisplatin-induced renal toxicity in rats. Findings of the present study show that CDF has superior potential than curcumin in (1) reversing cisplatin-induced renal injury markers and oxidative stress markers (serum N-urea, creatinine, MDA and 8-isoprostane levels); (2) restoring renal ion transport markers; (3) regulating the NF-κB and Nrf2 pathway; (iv) reversing multi-drug resistance markers; and (5) reversing the mTOR pathway. Our comprehensive animal studies provide solid evidence in support of the use of CDF in combination therapy to reduce cisplatin associated toxicity and warrants further clinical evaluation.

Cisplatin is one of the most widely used chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of solid and liquid tumors [25]. The wide range of cancers where cisplatin has been applied include testicular, ovarian, bladder, head and neck, esophagus, stomach and lung cancers, as well as lymphoma and osteosarcoma. Unfortunately, it is not specific, and as a DNA intercalating agent, shows considerable dose limiting toxicities [26]. Patients undergoing cisplatin therapy frequently suffer from severe toxicities such as nausea, vomiting, renal insufficiency, electrolyte abnormalities, myelosuppression, ototoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, hepatotoxicity and retinopathy affecting the gastrointestinal, renal, neurological and hematological systems even when administered at standard doses [27]. To date, no published guidelines exist for managing a cisplatin overdose and there is no known antidote for this very toxic drug. As presented in this article, the use of non-toxic agents such as CDF to overcome the toxicities of cisplatin could become a highly relevant strategy to reduce patient suffering.

In the past, a number of natural agents have been investigated for their cytoprotective effects with the goal to reduce chemotherapy associated toxicities. In particular, the anticlastogenic, anti-neoplastic, radioprotective and chemoprotective effects of curcumin have been well described [6, 28]. For example, Antunes et al. [29] demonstrated that curcumin and selenium can suppress the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity and lipid peroxidation in rats. The same group also demonstrated that curcumin can ameliorate cisplatin-induced clastogenesis in Wistar rat bone marrow cells [30]. Kuhad et al. [31] earlier reported the protective effect of curcumin against cisplatin-induced inflammation and nephrotoxicity. In another study the protective effect of curcumin in cisplatin-induced oxidative injury of rat testis through suppression of mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor-kappa B signaling pathways was demonstrated [32]. Additionally, Mendonça et al. [33] have shown that curcumin acts as a DNA protective agent against cisplatin-induced DNA damage in in vitro cell culture system. The above in vitro and in vivo supporting evidence certainly points to beneficial effects of curcumin in preventing different forms of cisplatin-induced toxicity. However, like many other natural agents, curcumin possess very poor bioavailability and this has served as a major hurdle for its clinical application [34]. Therefore, newer analogs that have superior bioavailability, yet retain the pleiotropic properties of curcumin are urgently needed. Making significant progress in the development of improved analogs of curcumin, our laboratory recently synthesized CDF (a difluoro curcumin) that shows nanomolar potency, longer half-life and better tissue distribution [13].

Cisplatin is well known to cause renal injury those results in activation of serum N-urea, creatinine as well as activation of oxidative stress markers such as MDA and 8-isoprostane. Additionally, enhancement in the DNA binding activity of NF-κB and the consequent activation of tumor promoting factors such as COX-2 have been implicated in cisplatin-induced toxicity [35]. Furthermore, over-expression of NF-κB has been implicated in the induction of pro-inflammatory proteins such as Nrf2 and HO-1 [36]. To this end our results show that oral administration of CDF could suppress renal injury markers (Table 1), suppress pro-inflammatory markers (Table 2) and the protein expression of not only the master regulators NF-κB p65 and COX-2 but most importantly, the effector proteins Nrf2 and HO-1 as well (Fig. 1). These studies clearly build the case for its use in combination with cisplatin based regimens. Similarly, several studies attributed the protective effect of curcumin in the kidney to the induction of the master regulator of antioxidant response Nrf2, inhibition of mitochondrial dysfunction, attenuation of inflammatory response, preservation of antioxidant enzymes and prevention of oxidative stress [37, 38].

The kidney is the most critical organ that maintains proper physiological ionic environment. It is the first organ to respond to disturbances in the ionic milieu in response to adverse hits by chemicals and drugs [39]. The kidney specializes in removing toxins, drugs, and other organic anions from the blood to extracellular space across the tubular epithelium into the lumen of nephrons by a process called "renal secretion" [40]. This is performed by a set of specialized proteins or transporters that reside at the basolateral and apical membranes that can transport various organic solutes. The major, known renal secretory transport systems belong to two distinct groups: the organic anion transporter (OAT) [41] and organic cation transporter (OCT) [42]. The levels of OATs (OAT1 and OAT2) as well as OCTs (OCT1 and OCT2) have been consistently shown to be suppressed in patients undergoing cisplatin therapy and serve as markers of renal toxicity [43]. Therefore, strategies that restore the expression of OATs are being considered in the clinic to overcome cisplatin related toxicities. Earlier, curcumin was shown to restore OATs and OCTs expression [44] and our presented findings on curcumin were in line with these published reports. However, of paramount significance is the observation that CDF showed much superior restoring capacity than curcumin in all the four transporters tested (Fig. 2). These findings clearly imply that our analog has greater potential in reversing the adverse effects of cisplatin than parent curcumin.

Multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRPs) have been well established for their role in conferring resistance to different drugs and natural agents [45] MRPs have been classified into many subtypes. MRP2, also called canalicular multi-specific organic anion transporter 1 (CMOAT), is a protein that in humans is encoded by the _ABCC2_ gene [46]. The other human organic anion transporter MRP4 (ABCC4) is an efflux pump for the purine end metabolite urate is the other major MRP that has been recognized to export NSAIDs and nucleoside analog drugs [47, 48]. In earlier studies, Wortelboer et al., [49] have shown that curcumin can suppress the expression of MRPs. We focused on MRP2 and MRP4 and similar to earlier findings, curcumin could reduce their expression. More intriguing is the observation that CDF has much more enhanced inhibitory effects on these two MDR proteins (Fig. 2).

The role of mTOR pathway in maintenance of tumors is well described [50–52]. Specifically, increased downstream phosphorylations of downstream effectors of mTOR, i.e., p70S6K and 4E-BP1 and Akt, have been reported in solid tumors [53]. To this end, curcumin was shown to decrease the total expression of mTOR and downstream [54]. Nevertheless, very few studies have shown the in vivo effects of curcumin on the mTOR pathway, and none have been shown with curcumin analogs. Similar to existing cell line findings both curcumin and CDF could also ameliorate the cisplatin-induced p-mTPOR, p70S6K and p-Akt expression of rat kidneys. However, CDF showed far superior efficacy in reducing the expression of phosphorylated proteins (Fig. 3).

In conclusion, we for the first time showed that curcumin analog CDF with higher potency and clinically relevant pharmacokinetic parameters prevents cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity by modulating organic anion export markers, drug resistance markers and through suppression of mTOR effector pathways. These pre-clinical findings pave the way for future clinical trials involving CDF to suppress the adverse effects of cisplatin and other platinum based chemotherapies.

### Acknowledgments

The authors thank the Veterinary Control and Research Institute of Elazig for providing the experimental facility and the Turkish Academy of Sciences (TUBA) for providing the fund.

### Conflict of Interest

