# Effects of traditional chinese cooking methods on formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines in lamb patties

## Abstract

Different amounts of the potent mutagenic and/or carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) are formed in muscle-based foods under different cooking methods. HAAs (9 varieties) in lamb patties cooked using traditional Chinese cooking methods (roasting, frying, panfrying, and stewing in seasonings) were investigated. The total HAAs contents in roasted, fried, pan-fried, and stewed patties were 4.39-123.15 ng/g, 3.59-43.24 ng/g, 0.71-10.05 ng/g, and 51.07-120.32 ng/g, respectively. Amounts of HAAs increased as cooking time increased. 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyridine (PhIP) was the dominant HAAs in deep roasted and fried samples, while 1-methyl- 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Harman) and 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Norharman) were the main HAAs in pan-fried and stewed samples. Types and contents of HAAs formed at different cooking times using different methods are unique. Stewing in seasoning generated a higher HAAs content than the high-temperature cooking methods roasting, frying, and pan-frying.

### Keywords

heterocyclic aromatic amine lamb patty traditional Chinese cooking method stewing roasting

Food Sci. Biotechnol. 23(3): 747-753 (2014) DOI 10.1007/s10068-014-0101-9 RESEARCH ARTICLE Effects of Traditional Chinese Cooking Methods on Formation of Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines in Lamb Patties Haitao Guo, Zhenyu Wang, Han Pan, Xin Li, Li Chen, Weili Rao, Yuan Gao, and Dequan Zhang Received June 27, 2013; revised October 29, 2013; accepted November 5, 2013; published online June 30, 2014 © KoSFoST and Springer 2014 Abstract Different amounts of the potent mutagenic and/ or carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) are formed in muscle-based foods under different cooking methods. HAAs (9 varieties) in lamb patties cooked using traditional Chinese cooking methods (roasting, frying, pan- frying, and stewing in seasonings) were investigated. The total HAAs contents in roasted, fried, pan-fried, and stewed patties were 4.39-123.15 ng/g, 3.59-43.24 ng/g, 0.71-10.05 ng/g, and 51.07-120.32 ng/g, respectively. Amounts of HAAs increased as cooking time increased. 2-amino-1-methyl-6- phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyridine (PhIP) was the dominant HAAs in deep roasted and fried samples, while 1-methyl- 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Harman) and 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Norharman) were the main HAAs in pan-fried and stewed samples. Types and contents of HAAs formed at different cooking times using different methods are unique. Stewing in seasoning generated a higher HAAs content than the high-temperature cooking methods roasting, frying, and pan-frying. Keywords: heterocyclic aromatic amine, lamb patty, traditional Chinese cooking method, stewing, roasting Introduction Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) originate from muscle- based foods cooked at high temperatures (1). Epidemiologic studies have shown that some HAAs are highly mutagenic and almost all of them are also carcinogenic. To date, more than 25 HAAs have been isolated as potent mutagenic/ carcinogenic compounds from cooked meat (2). The International Agency for Research on Cancer (3) reported that some HAAs, such as 2-amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoline (MeIQ), 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoxaline (MeIQx), 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenyl- imidazo [4,5-b] pyridine (PhIP), 2-amino-9H-pyrido [2,3- b] indole (AαC), 2-amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido [2,3-b] indole (MeAαC), and 3-amino-1-methyl- 5H-pyrdo [4,3-b] indole (Trp-P-2) are classified as possible human carcinogens, while 2-amino-3-methylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoline (IQ) is classified as a probable carcinogen. Besides, 1-methyl-9H- pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Harman) and 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Norharman) can enhance the mutagenic activity of other compounds (4). Formation of HAAs in muscle-based foods is mainly influenced by the cooking time, temperature, and cooking method (5). HAAs in cooked poultry, beef, pork, and fish have been studied (6). Oz et al. (7) studied the effects of microwave, oven, hot plate, pan-frying, and barbecuing on formation of HAAs in chicken and fish. The effects of different cooking methods, including pan-frying, deep- frying, charcoal, and grilling on formation of HAAs in duck and chicken were studied by Liao et al. (8). However, there is no study reporting the effects of Chinese cooking methods on formation of HAAs in lamb. Lamb, which is rich in nutrition and has a unique flavor, is a popular meat in China, especially in some minority nationality areas. The main Chinese cooking methods of lamb are roasting, frying, pan-frying, and stewing with seasonings (salt, sugar, green Chinese onion, ginger, and Chinese cinnamon). Roasted lamb is a popular meat product that is usually sprinkled with various seasonings and roasted over charcoal or in an oven. For frying or pan- frying, lamb spread with batter is often fried in oil for a Haitao Guo, Zhenyu Wang, Han Pan, Xin Li, Li Chen, Weili Rao, Yuan Gao, Dequan Zhang ( ) Institute of Agro-Products Processing Science and Technology, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Key Laboratory of Agro-Products Processing, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing 100193, China Tel, Fax: +86-10-62818740 E-mail: dequan.zhang.caas@gmail.com 748 Guo et al. short time (1.0-8.0 min). Stewing in seasonings is a popular cooking method in China in which lamb is boiled in water with condiments for several hours. There is currently no good understanding of how HAAs are generated in lamb cooked using traditional Chinese methods. The aims of the present study were to investigate the effects of traditional Chinese cooking methods (roasting, frying, pan-frying, and stewing with seasonings) and different cooking times on formation of HAAs in lamb, to assess human exposure to these compounds in cooked lamb, and to provide methods to reduce levels of HAAs in cooked lamb. Materials and Methods Materials All chemicals and solvents used were of HPLC or analytical grade. Ultrapure water was prepared using a Milli-Q Advantage water purification system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Methanol was purchased from Fisher Inc. (Waltham, MA, USA), acetonitrile was obtained from MREDA (Columbia, TN, USA), and methylene chloride, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, and diatomaceous earth were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent (Beijing, China). Bond Elut cartridges were purchased from Agilent Technologies (Los Angeles, CA, USA) and an Oasis MCX cartridge (3 cc/60 mg, 30 µm) was provided by Waters (Milford, MA, USA) for solid phase extraction. The 9 heterocyclic aromatic amine standards 2-amino- 3,4-dimethylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoline (IQ), 2-amino-3,8- dimethylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoxaline (MeIQx), 2-amino- 3,4,8-trimethylimidazo [4,5-f] quinoxaline (4,8-DiMeIQx), 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b] pyridine (PhIP), 1-methyl-9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Harman), 9H-pyrido [3,4-b] indole (Norharman), 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido [4,3-b] indole (Trp-P-2), 2-amino-9H-pyrido [2,3-b]indole (AαC), and 2-amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido [2,3-b]indole (MeAαC) were purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals (Downsview, ON, Canada). The hind leg of lamb with topside, knuckle, and silverside were purchased from a local market in Beijing, China in August of 2012 and stored at −18 oC until used. Sample preparation Muscle without visible fat or connective tissue was ground through a pore plate (pore diameter 6 mm) with a meat grinder (SZ-22; Chengdong xuzhong, Sichuan, China). An amount of 50 g of the meat paste was placed into a mould to produce uniform patties (6 cm diameter×1.5 cm thickness), then patties (n=3) were cooked by roasting, frying, pan-frying, or stewing with seasonings for different times. For roasting, patties were cooked in an oven at 200 oC for 5, 15, 25, 35, and 45 min. For frying, 3 patties were fried in a stainless fryer in soybean oil at 200 oC. For pan frying, a stainless steel pan was sprayed with 5 g of soybean oil and preheated to 200 oC, then patties were pan-fried for 2.0, 3.5, 5.0, 6.5, and 8.0 min. For stewing with seasonings, 150 g of paste was mixed with 0.75 g of transglutaminase and divided into 3 equal moulds, then salted at 4 oC overnight. The prepared patties were stewed in 1.25 L of tap water with 50 g of sugar, 25 g of monosodium glutamate, 25 g of spice powder, 100 g of oyster sauce, 50 g of cooking wine, 50 g of soy sauce, 7 g of star aniseed, 12 g of ginger, 10 g of green Chinese onion, and 9 g of Chinese cinnamon at 100 oC for 1,2,4, and 6 h. Extraction of heterocyclic aromatic amines Heterocyclic aromatic amines were extracted according to the methods of Gross and Grüter (9) and Messner and Murkovic (10) with slight modification. Each patty was ground into comminuted meat with a grinder (SZ-22; Chengdong xuzhong) and 2 g of the ground meat was added to 10 mL of 2 M NaOH (analytical reagent; Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, Beijing, China). The resulting suspension was mixed by magnetic stirring (EMS-19; Honour Instrument, Tianjin, China) for 20 min, then extracted using ultrasound (5820; Ameritech, Tianjin, China) for 30 min. The resulting alkaline extraction solution was mixed with 12 g of diatomaceous earth and transferred to empty Bond Elut cartridges. Preliminary work using different solvents for extraction showed that the most efficient recovery of the 9 HAAs was achieved using dichloromethane (chrom atographic pure; Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) rather than ethyl acetate (analytical reagent; Sinopharm Chemical Reagent), so dichloromethane was used for extraction. The eluent was passed through coupled Oasis MCX cartridges (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) washed with 2 mL of 0.1 M HCl-MeOH (chromatographic pure; Fisher Scientific) (40/60, v/v), 2 mL of MeOH (chromato- graphic pure; Fisher Scientific), and 2 mL of ultrapure water (Direct-Q 3; Millipore, Boston, MA, USA).Then, cartridges were washed with 2 mL of MeOH-ammonia (chromatographic pure; Fisher Scientific) (15/85, v/v). The eluent was flown dried with a nitrogen blowing instrument (UGC-12C; Yousheng Technology, Beijing, China), then dissolved in 200 µL of MeOH (chroma tographic pure; Fisher Scientific). HPLC analyses HPLC analyses were performed using an Agilent 1200 series system with a UV detector, a degasser (G1322A; Agilent, Palo Alto, California, USA), a quatpump (G1311A; Agilent), and automatic liquid sampler (ALS) (G1329A; Agilent), temperature control column oven (TCC) (G1316A; Agilent), and diode array detector (DAD; Agilent) (G1315D; Agilent). HAAs were separated using a TSK-gel ODS-80TM column (TOSOH, Effects of Chinese Cooking Methods on Formation of HAAs 749 Tokyo, Japan) (5 µm, 250×4.6 mm i.d.). Separation was performed at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min using gradient elution with 0.01 M phosphoric acid (analytical reagent; Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) (pH 3.6) as solvent A and acetonitrile (chromatographic pure; MREDA, Columbia, Md, USA) as solvent B. The gradient program was: 95- 75% A (5-25% B) for 0.0-15.0 min; 75-55% A (25-45% B) for 15.0-25.0 min; 55-70% A (30-45% B) for 25.0- 30.0 min; 70-95% A (5-30% B) for 30.0-30.1 min; and 95% A (5% B) for 30.1-35 min. The injection volume was 30 µL. Detection of HAAs was performed at 228 nm (AαC, MeAαC), 253 nm (IQ, Norharman, and Harman), 263 Snm (MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, and Trp-P-2), and 321 nm (PhIP). Identification of HAAs was carried out by comparing retention times, UV spectra recorded for standards, and HAAs standard spiked samples. Con-centrations were calculated using standard curves prepared with different concentrations of standards. Quan-titative determination was performed using an external calibration curve method Gross and Grüter (9) and Messner and Murkovic (10). Coefficients of the regression line (r 2) for HAAs standard curves were 0.9991 for IQ, 0.9987 for MeIQx, 0.9986 for 4,8-DiMeIQx, 0.9971 for PhIP, 0.9998 for Harman, 0.9997 for Norharman, 0.9996 for Trp-P-2, 0.9991 for AαC, and 0.9995 for MeAαC. Statistical analysis All analyses were carried out using the SAS system for Windows, version 8 (Chapel Hill, NC, USA). Data are presented as means±standard deviation (SD). Means were compared using Duncan’s multiple- range test at a significance level of p&lt;0.05. Results and Discussion Recovery of HAAs Chromatography results for 9 HAAs standard solutions are shown in Fig. 1. Recovery values of 9 HAAs were: IQ (53.95±0.72%), MeIQx (73.22±0.41%), 4,8-DiMeIQx (73.95±0.31%), PhIP (90.75±0.73%), Harman (93.37±0.43%), Norharman (90.52±0.80%), Trp- P-2 (53.30±0.96%), AαC (84.30±0.45%), and MeAαC (70.26±0.74%). In a study using the MCX extraction method, Polak et al. (6) reported that recovery values of HAAs were between 83 and 100%. Oz et al. (11) reported recovery values of HAAs between 32 and 66%, similar to results of this study. Limits of detection (LOD) were 0.10, 0.05, 0.09, 0.18, 0.33, 0.18, 0.06, 1.40, and 0.70 ng/g for IQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, PhIP, Harman, Norharman, Trp-P-2, AαC, and MeAαC with a signal/noise ratio of 3:1. Effects of cooking methods on total HAAs The effects of different cooking methods on the content of total HAAs are shown in Fig. 2. The content of total HAAs ranged from 51.07 ng/g-120.32 ng/g for stewing in seasoning with cooking for 60 min to 360 min (low-temperature cooking method). Content ranges for samples cooked by roasting, frying, and pan-frying for all cooking times were 4.39- 123.15 ng/g, 3.59-43.24 ng/g, and 0.71-10.05 ng/g of HAAs, respectively. Patties cooked by stewing contained the highest HAAs content (p&lt;0.05), followed by roasting, frying and pan-frying. The total HAAs content increased with cooking time using the 4 cooking methods (p&lt;0.05). At stewing times longer than 1 h (p&lt;0.05), the total HAAs content in samples was sharply increased from 51.07 ng/g (stewed for 1 h) to 95.33 ng/g (stewed for 2 h) (p&lt;0.05). In roasted and fried samples cooked for 2.5 and 6.5 min, the HAAs contents were dramatically higher than in samples cooked for less than 2.5 min and 6.5 min (p&lt;0.05). As the pan-frying time increased, the concentration of HAAs increased gradually. The main HAAs in stewing with seasoning were Harman and Norharman, whereas polar HAAs were the dominant forms in the high temperature cooking methods roasting, frying, and pan-frying. Fig. 1. HPLC chromatograms of 9 HAAs standards. Peak 1, IQ; peak 2, MeIQx; peak 3, DiMeIQx; peak 4, NorHarman; peak 5, Harman; peak 6, Trp-P-2; peak 7, PhIP; peak 8, AaC; peak 9, MeAaC 750 Guo et al. Fig. 2. Total content of nine heterocyclic aromatic amines in cooked lamb (ng/g). A: stewing in seasoning (60 min), roasting (5 min), frying (1.0 min), pan-frying (2.0 min); B: stewing in seasoning (120 min), roasting (15 min), frying (1.5 min), pan- frying (3.5 min); C: stewing in seasoning (240 min), roasting (25 min), frying (2.0 min), pan-frying (5.0 min); D: stewing in seasoning (360 min), roasting (35 min), frying (2.5 min), pan- frying (6.5 min); E: stewing in seasoning (−), roasting (45 min), frying (3.0 min), pan-frying (8.0 min) Pais et al. (12) reported that the HAAs content in chicken thigh roasted at 275 oC for 30 min was higher than 35.5 ng/g. Oz et al. (11) reported 0.62 ng/g of total HAAs in pan-fried lamb chops at a well done level, and 3.06 ng/ g in barbecued samples. Liao et al. (8) reported 21.3 ng/g of HAAs in deep-fried chicken breast. Differences between the results of this study and other reported results were due to different materials used. Ground lamb was used in this study. Stewing generated dramatically higher HAAs than the other cooking methods, probably because of seasonings that increased formation of total HAAs (13,14). Some added seasonings may promote HAAs formation due to acceleration of the interactions between amino acids and reducing sugars during Maillard reactions. Dong et al. (15) reported that addition of an excess amount of onion (8%) promoted HAAs formation in cooked beef patties. Sugars and oyster sauce seasonings are precursors to HAAS formation. Lan et al. (16) reported that pork marinated with soy sauce and rock candy generated a higher HAAs content than a control group. Dissolution of HAAs precursors from muscle may occur when heated for a long time in a water blend. In this study, for all 4 cooking methods the total concentration of HAAs increased with the cooking time. Oz et al. (7) reported the same trend for chicken and fish cooked using microwave, oven, hot-plate, pan-frying, and barbecuing from rare to very well done. In this study, when the roasting time increased from 25 min to 35 min, or from 35 min to 45 min, the total HAAs content increased (Fig. 2) and the same trend was also found in fried samples. Generally, the total HAAs content in muscle tissue was low due to being processed for a short time (stewing in seasoning &lt;120 min, roasting &lt;15 min, frying &lt;1.5 min, pan frying &lt;3.5 min for each side). The HAAs content results in this study were consistent with other published results (17-19). Effect of cooking methods on HAAs contents The effects of different cooking methods on the amounts of the 4 polar (IQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, and PhIP) and 5 non- polar HAAs (Harman, Norharman, Trp-P-2, AαC, and MeAαC) are presented in Table 1. MeIQx, Harman, and Norharman were the most common HAAs for all 4 cooking methods. High amounts of Harman (6.9 ng/g) and Norharman (7.5 ng/g) were found in pan-fried chicken breast (20). Toribio et al. (21) reported that 180.2 ng/g of Norharman and 240.7 ng/g of Harman were detected in meat extracts that contained high amounts of the HAAs precursors amino acids, reducing sugars, and other substances. The concentrations of the 9 varieties of HAAs increased as the cooking time was extended. The polar HAAs were the most abundant HAAs in roasted and fried samples, while the non-polar HAAs were dominant in pan- fried and stewed samples. Liao et al. (8) reported 4 polar HAAs and 6 non-polar HAAs in chicken and duck breast pan-fried at 180 oC for 5 min per side. The reported polar HAAs content of was 22.97 ng/g and the non-polar HAAs content was 4.43 ng/g in pan-fried chicken. Differences between the results of this report the results of Liao et al. (8) probably relate to the type of meat used (chicken and duck breast vs. lamb). Beef is called red meat and pork and chicken are called white meat. The main difference is a low fat content for white meat. For chicken meat, the amino acid and the glucose and creatine (precursors of HAAs) contents also differ from red meat. Sun et al. (17) reported that the highest concentration of HAAs was in ground meat, followed by sliced meat and small meat cubes, which can account for the differences between the results present herein and the results of Liao et al. (8). IQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, PhIP, Harman, Norharman, AαC, and MeAαC were detected in roasted meat, but not Trp-P-2. The total HAAs content of roasted lamb for each roasting time (5, 15, 25, 35, and 45 min) were 4.39, 8.39, 10.47, 54.91, and 123.15 ng/g, respectively (Fig. 2). The amount of IQ was between 0.92 and 4.39 ng/g in all samples (Table 1). Roasting did not form a high level of HAAs (5,7). IQ was not detected in lamb chops cooked for different times (11). However, Sun et al. (17) reported IQ in minced lamb which was oven-roasted at 250 oC for 30 min and in lamb cubes with red pepper powder, black pepper powder, sugar, and salt. Differences in these results probably relate to different types of meat (lamb) and Effects of Chinese Cooking Methods on Formation of HAAs 751 Table 1. Effects of cooking method and time on heterocyclic aromatic amine amounts in cooked lamb patties (ng/g) 1) Cooking method Time (min) IQ MeIQx 4,8-DiMeIQx PhIP Harman Norharman Trp-P-2 AαC MeAαC Roast 5 0.92±0.11 c 0.55±0.00 b ND ND 0.38±0.04 c 0.73±0.18 c ND 1.81±0.03 a ND 15 1.29±0.25 c 0.61±0.01 b ND 00.59±0.22 c b1.68±0.00 bc 1.39±0.20 c ND 1.79±0.02 a 1.04±0.04 a 25 1.49±0.17 c 0.76±0.20 b ND 02.03±0.26 c b2.01±0.09 bc 1.45±0.01 c ND 1.81±0.09 a 0.92±0.38 a 35 2.59±0.55 b 2.75±0.79 a 0.30±0.02 a 39.39±8.89 b 3.18±0.92 b 2.89±0.22 b ND 2.07±0.13 a 1.74±0.51 a 45 4.39±0.10 a 4.31±1.42 a 0.37±0.08 a 097.13±11.29 a 7.23±1.07 a 6.17±0.52 a ND 2.19±0.47 a 1.36±0.96 a Frying 1.0 ND ND 1.08±0.05 d 00.44±0.11 c 0.49±0.14 d 0.70±0.09 b ND ND 0.88±0.04 b 1.5 ND 0.58±0.01 c b1.13±0.09 cd 00.68±0.19 c b0.74±0.16 cd 0.78±0.11 b ND ND 0.85±0.06 b 2.0 ND 0.61±0.02 c 1.24±0.06 c 02.62±0.49 c b1.17±0.15 bc 0.83±0.09 b ND ND 0.83±0.04 b 2.5 ND 0.76±0.04 b 1.50±0.10 b 13.82±2.73 b b1.47±0.33 ab 1.00±0.10 a ND ND 0.70±0.05 b 3.0 ND 0.94±0.06 a 1.69±0.10 a 32.24±5.68 a 1.86±0.40 a 1.14±0.07 a ND ND 5.37±1.97 a Pan- Frying 2.0 0.53±0.02 d ND ND 00.18±0.02 e ND ND ND ND ND 3.5 0.55±0.01 d 0.67±0.02 d ND 00.72±0.01 d 00.50±0.03 c 00.56±0.02 d ND 1.56±0.09 d ND 5.0 0.58±0.00 c 0.76±0.03 c ND 01.16±0.09 c 00.58±0.03 c 00.63±0.01 c 0.52±0.03 b 1.81±0.04 c ND 6.5 0.61±0.01 b 1.03±0.04 b ND 01.84±0.20 b 00.70±0.04 b 00.95±0.05 b 0.63±0.04 a 2.02±0.14 b ND 8.0 0.65±0.01 a 1.16±0.06 a ND 02.98±0.14 a 00.96±0.11 a 01.36±0.06 a 0.68±0.05 a 2.26±0.07 a ND Stewing in seasoning 60 ND b0.59±0.00 bc 0.79±0.02 a ND 27.89±3.12 c 21.80±1.43 c ND ND ND 120 0.48±0.01 b 0.60±0.01 b 0.76±0.02 a ND 53.73±2.24 b 39.76±0.34 b ND ND ND 240 b0.49±0.00 ab 0.57±0.00 c 0.84±0.10 a ND 60.68±4.58 a 39.18±1.52 b ND ND ND 360 0.49±0.00 a 0.69±0.02 a 0.83±0.02 a ND b58.59±3.35 ab 59.72±3.40 a ND ND ND 1)Values shown are mean±SD. Values within the same column with different letters within cooking method are significantly different (p&lt;0.05); ND, not detected different cooking procedures. In this study, lamb patties were not made of integral muscle, but of ground lamb. Harman and Norharman were formed during all roasting times (5, 15, 25, 35, and 45 min) with concentration ranges of 0.38-7.23 ng/g and 0.73-6.17 ng/g, respectively (Table 1). Busquets et al. (18) reported much higher Harman (67.7 ng/g) and Norharman amounts (458 ng/g) in lamb broiled for 6 min, probably caused by a longer cooking time at a high temperature. PhIP was not found at boiling times less than 5 min at 200 oC, but was present at boiling times of 35 min and 45 min, and the highest amount of PhIP was higher than the 90 ng/g reported in this study, which was in agreement with Sun’s (17) study. A total of 3 polar HAAs and 3 non-polar HAAs were present in lamb fried for different times. There was a significant increase (p&lt;0.05) in the amount of each HAAs variety with an increase in the frying time. The amount of PhIP was highest, followed by MeAαC, Harman, 4,8- DiMeIQx, Norharman and MeIQx. The highest content of total HAAs (mainly PhIP) was 43.24 ng/g when frying for 3 min (32.24 ng/g) (Fig. 2 and Table 1). Generally, published results agreed with the results of this study and small differences can be attributed to the details of preparation. Murkovic et al. (22) reported that the most abundant variety of HAAs in fried beef was MeIQx, followed by IQ and PhIP. The high content of PhIP in this study probably was due to a high cooking temperature (220 oC). According to Krul et al. (23), the PhIP content was as high as 19.4 ng/ g in chicken breast after frying at 200 oC for 25 min, but the sample weight used was lower than in this study. Skog et al. (5) reported levels of 6 HAAs of &lt;4 ng/g in lamb chops fried at 150 to 225 oC for 9 min, and a total HAAs content of up to 7.8 ng/g. In addition, the 2 polar HAAs varieties MeIQx (0.4-1.0 ng/g) and PhIP (0-2.4 ng/g) were found in lamb chops fried to medium and well-done (24). Pan-frying causes high levels of HAAs, especially PhIP and MeIQx (25-27). In the present study, 1 g of pan-fried lamb was estimated to contain 0.71-10.05 ng/g of total HAAs (Fig. 2). Individual HAAs contents were 0.53-0.65 ng/g of IQ, 0-1.16 ng/g of MeIQx, 0.18-2.98 ng/g of PhIP, 0-0.96 ng/g of Harman, 0-1.36 ng/g of Norharman, 0-0.68 ng/g of Trp-P-2, and 0-2.26 ng/g of AαC (Table 1) Pan-frying generally produced MeIQx at levels below 2 ng/g in this study. Krul et al. (23) reported a higher MeIQx content of 10.4 ng/g in roasted chicken breast, probably due to a longer cooking time (15 min) and a higher cooking temperature (220 oC). PhIP usually exists in cooked meat at higher levels than other polar HAAs. Brockstedt et al. (28) detected 70, 64.9, and 5.8 ng/g of PhIP in pan-fried skinless and boneless chicken and turkey breast, and in grilled lamb steak without fat and bones, respectively. Differences in results between the studies cited above can be explained by the different types of raw meat used (29). IQ was isolated from most cooked samples and the content was usually below 1 ng/g in this study. Busquets et al. (18) reported that IQ levels in lamb steak grilled for 11 min at 752 Guo et al. 175 to 200 oC were lower than 0.04 ng/g. Oz et al. (7) also reported similar results (0-0.26 ng/g IQ) for chicken chops pan-fried at 200 oC for 5-10 min. Stewing, compared with roasting, frying and, pan-frying is a mild cooking method because of a lower cooking temperature (&lt;100 oC). However, seasonings are usually used in stewing for several hours. There are reports on the effects of stewing/boiling on the HAAs formation (16,17, 20). When whole chicken/chicken breast were boiled in water without seasoning and spices for 4 h, only Harman and Norharman were detected, and the highest content was below 0.4 ng/g (20). When pork was cooked for 4 h in the presence of 10% soy sauce and 1% rock candy, the 7 HAAs of IQ, MeIQx, MeIQ, 4,8-DiMeIQx, Trp-p-1, PhIP, and AαC were detected, and the highest content was MeIQx at 3.43 ng/g (17). Differences between samples may be related to the use of soy sauce and rock candy, which both contain HAAs precursors. In this study, the four HAAs of IQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, Harman, and Norharman were found in stewed lamb and levels increased to 0.49, 0.69, 58.59, and 59.72 ng/g (p&lt;0.05) after cooking for 6 h compared to ones cooked for 1 h, respectively. The amount of total HAAs increased significantly (p&lt;0.05) during the stewing and up to to 120.32 ng/g at 6 h, most of which was due to Harman and Norharman, the amounts of which were much higher than reported by Solyakov and Skog (20). The presence of soy sauce containing the amino acid, glucose, and sugar HAAs precursors, and the long heating time were factors. The types and contents of HAAs generated in cooked lamb using different cooking procedures are dependent on the cooking method and time. A total of 8 specific HAAs were found in roasted lamb. Stewing produced 5 of the 9 known HAAs. Amounts of PhIP, Harman, and Norharman in all samples were highest. Stewing in seasoning produced the highest amount of total HAAs, followed by roasting, frying, and pan-frying. The results of this study indicate that the HAAs levels in cooked lamb increased with an increase in cooking time. Reductions in cooking times should reduce the amounts of HAAs produced in lamb during cooking. Acknowledgments The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Key Technology Research and Development Program of China (2012 BAD29B03-05). References 1. Klassen RD, Lewis D, Lau BP-Y, Sen NP. Heterocyclic aromatic amines in cooked hamburgers and chicken obtained from local fast food outlets in the Ottawa region. Food Res. Int. 35: 837-847 (2002) 2. Alaejos M, Ayala JH, González V, Afonso AM. Analytical methods applies to the determination of heterocyclic aromatic amines in foods. J. Chromatogr. B 862: 15-42 (2008) 3. IARC. IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans. No. 56. Some naturally occurring substances: Food items and constituents. Heterocyclic aromatic amines and mycotoxins. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France (1993) 4. Nagao M, Yahagi T, Sugimura T. Differences in effects of Norharman with various classes of chemical mutagens and amounts of S-9. Biochem. Bioph. Res. Co. 83: 373-378 (1978) 5. Skog K, Augustsson K, Steineck G, Stenberg M, Jägerstad M. Polar and non-polar heterocyclic amines in cooked fish and meat products and their corresponding pan residues. Food Chem. Toxicol. 35: 555- 565 (1997) 6. Polak T, Andrensek S, Zlender B, Gasperlin L. Effects of ageing and low internal temperature of grilling on the formation of heterocyclic amines in beef Longissimus dorsi muscle. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 42: 256-264 (2009) 7. Oz F, Kaban G, Kaya M. Effects of cooking methods and levels on formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines in chicken and fish with Oasis extraction method. LWT- Food Sci. Technol. 43: 1345-1350 (2010) 8. Liao GZ, Wang GY, Xu XL, Zhou GH. Effect of cooking methods on the formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines in chicken and duck breast. Meat Sci. 85: 149-154 (2010) 9. Gross GA, Grüter A. Quantitation of mutagenic/carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in food products. J. Chromatogr. A 592: 271-278 (1992) 10. Messner C, Murkovic M. Evaluation of a new model system for studying the formation of heterocyclic amines. J. Chromatogr. B 802: 19-26 (2004) 11. Oz F, Kaban G, Kaya M. Heterocyclic aromatic amine contents of beef and lamb chops cooked by different methods to varying levels. J. Anim. Vet. Adv. 9: 1436-1440 (2010) 12. Pais P, Salmon CP, Knize MG, Felton JS. Formation of mutagenic/ carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in dry-heated model systems, meats and meat drippings. J. Agr. Food Chem. 47: 1098-1108 (1999) 13. Felton JS, Malfatti MA, Knize MG, Salmon CP, Hopmans EC, Wu RW. Health risks of heterocyclic amines. Mutat. Res. 376: 37-41 (1997) 14. Jägerstad M, Skog K, Arvidsson P, Solyakov A. Chemistry, formation and occurrence of genetoxic heterocyclic amines identified in model systems and cooked foods. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 207: 419-427 (1998) 15. Dong A, Lee J, Shin HS. Influence of natural food ingredients on the formation of heterocyclic amines in fried beef patties and chicken breasts. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 20: 359-365 (2011) 16. Lan C, Chen B. Effects of soy sauce and sugar on the formation of heterocyclic amines in marinated foods. Food Chem. Toxicol. 40: 989-1000 (2002) 17. Sun L, Zhang F, Yong W, Chen S, Yang ML, Ling Y, Chu X, Lin JM. Potential sources of carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in Chinese mutton shashlik. Food Chem. 123: 647-652 (2010) 18. Busquets R, Bordas M, Toribio F, Puignou L, Galceran MT. Occurrence of heterocyclic amines in several home-cooked meat dishes of the Spanish diet. J. Chromatogr. B 802: 79-86 (2004) 19. Lan CM, Kao TH, Chen BH. Effect of heating time and antioxidants on the formation of heterocyclic amines in marinated foods. J. Chromatogr. B 802: 27-37 (2004) 20. Solyakov A, Skog K. Screening for heterocyclic amines in chicken cooked in various ways. Food Chem. Toxicol. 40: 1205-1211 (2002) 21. Toribio F, Moyano E, Puignou L, Galceran MT. Ion-trap tandem mass spectrometry for the determination of heterocyclic amines in food. J. Chromatogr. A 948: 267-281 (2002) 22. Murkovic M, Steinberg D, Pfannhauser W. Antioxidant spices reduce the formation of heterocyclic amines in fried meat. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 207: 477-480 (1998) 23. Krul CAM, Luiten-Schuite A, Baan R, Verhagen H, Feron V, Havenaar R. Application of a dynamic in vitro gastrointestinal tract Effects of Chinese Cooking Methods on Formation of HAAs 753 model to study the availability of food mutagens, using heterocyclic aromatic amines as model compounds. Food Chem. Toxicol. 38: 783-792 (2000) 24. Norrish AE, Ferguson LR, Knize MG, Felton JS, Sharpe SJ, Jackson RT. Heterocyclic amine content of cooked meat and risk of prostate cancer. J. Natl. Cancer I. 91: 2038-2044 (1999) 25. Zimmerli B, Rhyn P, Zoller O, Schlatter J. Occurrence of heterocyclic aromatic amines in the Swiss diet: Analytical method, exposure estimation and risk assessment. Food Addit. Contam. 18: 533-551 (2001) 26. Sinha R. An epidemiologic approach to studying heterocyclic amines. Mutat. Res. 506-507: 197-204 (2002) 27. Keating GA, Bogen KT. Estimates of heterocyclic amine intake in the US population. J. Chromatogr. B 802: 127-133 (2004) 28. Brockstedt U, Pfau W. Formation of 2-amino-carbolines in pan-fried poultry and 32P-postlabelling analysis of DNA adducts. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 207: 472-476 (1998) 29. Alaejos M, Ana Afonso M. Factors that affect the content of heterocyclic aromatic amines in foods. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. F. 10: 52-108 (2011) 
