# Report: Investigation of anti-cancer effects of cherry in vitro

### Abstract

Cherry (Prunus Cerasus) is still one of the most popular preserve in Turkish cuisine. Cherry has been traditionally used for the treatment of inflammatory-related symptoms. Recent researches have proved that cherry is a valuable natural source of some important bioactive compounds in human health preservation. Evidence suggests that, cherry consumption may decrease the risk of chronic diseases and cancer. The aim of the present study was to determine the effects of cherry on breast cancer cells lines, asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) level and certain multidrug-resistant bacteria. The cancer cell proliferation activity and analysis of apoptotic-necrotic cells was evaluated by using the 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and scoring of apoptotic cell nuclei. Measurement of ADMA and the minimum inhibitory concentration was accomplished by HPLC and the micro dilution broth method. The results showed that, extracts of cherry exhibit anti-proliferative activity in mammary adenocarcinoma (MCF-7) &amp; mouse mammary tumor cell (4T1) breast cancer cells lines as well as induction of apoptosis, lower ADMA concentrations in cell cultures treated with cherry extract and antibacterial effects against certain multidrug-resistant bacteria in vitro. These findings may open new horizons for traditional anti-inflammatory product as prophylactic-therapeutic agent from cancer, cardiovascular diseases and multidrug-resistant infections. 