# Seaweeds-Derived Bioactive Materials for the Prevention and Treatment of Female’s Cancer

## Abstract

Seaweeds are a famous delicacy in Eastern hemisphere. In addition to its food value, structurally diverse biologically active molecules with great pharmaceutical and biomedical potential have been reported to be present in the seaweeds. The epidemiologic studies have correlates the seaweeds consumption and health benefit effects on female subject. Furthermore, seaweeds and its derived components have extensively been investigated for their anti-cancer anti-viral activities. As seaweeds have the potential to both benefit health and improve food acceptability, seaweeds and its metabolites offer exciting potential as ingredients in the development of functional foods, nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals. This contribution highlights seaweeds health benefits effects for cancer in female subject.

### Keywords


## 8.1 Introduction

The wide diversity of marine organisms is being recognized as rich sources of functional materials [1]. Among marine organisms, seaweeds are still identified as under-exploited plant resources; although they have long been used as food sources and traditional remedies. In Eastern hemisphere, seaweeds have always been of particular interest as marine food sources. Seaweeds accounted for more than 10 % of Japanese diet with average consumption reached an average 1.4 kg/person/year [2]. In Korea, new mothers are served with _miyeok-guk_ (seaweeds soup) after deliver their babies up to 37 days [3]. Korean believes that _miyeok-guk_ provide complete nutrition to help the new mother to recover and regain their energy.

Seaweeds have been demonstrated as rich sources of structurally diverse biologically active molecules with great pharmaceutical and biomedical potential therefore it represents one of the most nutritious plant foods [4]. The tradition and everyday habits of seaweeds consumption has made possible a large numbers of epidemiological studies showing the health benefits linked to seaweeds consumption. Considering combination with international diet-related chronic disease incidences, a significant environmental factors including dietary difference between populations varying in seaweeds consumption have revealed. For example, several epidemiologic studies show that seaweeds consumption correlates with low breast cancer rates in Japan and China compared to North America and Europe [5, 6]. It has also been reported that neurodegenerative cases in East Asian countries were lower than Europe (p &lt; 0.0004) [7].

General utilization of seaweeds in food products has grown steadily since the early 1980s. In recent years, consumers in developed countries are turning to more natural and nutritional foods, particularly seaweeds (Fig. 8.1). Seaweeds have recently been approved in France for human consumption, thus opening for the food and fisheries industries. During 2003, it was estimated that about one million tons of seaweeds were harvested in thirty-five countries mainly as food sources. Several seaweeds species are consumed by human directly after only minor pre-processing such as drying. _Porphyra_ sp. which is commercially known as nori or lavers are the most widely consumed among edible red seaweeds worldwide. Among green seaweeds, sea lettuces are the most common, ubiquitous, and environmentally important genera. Sea lettuces comprise the genus _Ulva_, a group of edible green seaweeds which is widely distributed along the coasts of the world’s oceans and often found in the mid and upper tidal zones. Sea lettuces or sometimes termed as green laver are found in tidal and near tidal seawater worldwide, generally anchored to rocks or other algae. They are easily identified by its paper thin, semi translucent, and vibrant green color. Most sea lettuces are gathered wild as it grows prolifically wherever there are sufficient nutrients, but some is farmed. Many species of sea lettuces are reported to be tolerant of organic and metal pollution; hence, if we consumed, we need to make sure they are collected far from any potential sources of pollution.



In recent years, nutritional value, and potential health benefits of marine algae have been intensively investigated and reviewed. In spite of extensive studies and reviews on nutritional value, and potential health benefits of marine algae for human, there is little available literature focusing on potential benefits role of seaweeds in female subject. Hence, this contribution focuses on biological roles of seaweeds and presents an overview of their potential benefits for female health .

## 8.2 Seaweeds-Derived Bioactive Materials for the Treatment and Prevention of Female’s Cancer

### 8.2.1 Anti-breast Cancer Activities

Breast cancer is the second most common frequent cancer in the world, and is by far the most leading cause of cancer-related death among female worldwide [8, 9]. Globally, more than 1 million patients are diagnosed annually, representing around 10 % of all newly diagnosed cancer cases [10]. Geographical variation incidence and mortality rates of breast cancer suggest that the known risk factors for breast cancer may vary and that environmental factors are of greater importance than genetic factors [11]. For example, the mortality rate for premenopausal breast cancer is almost four times greater in the Western world, compared with Eastern and one importance difference in the diet between these two populations is higher consumption of fish and seaweeds in the Eastern populations [7].

Traditional Eastern breast cancer medicine has long used seaweeds as a cancer treatment to “soften” tumors and “reduce” nodulation. Teas et al. demonstrated that diet containing 5 %_Laminaria angustata_ significantly delays the tumors occurrence in female Sprague-Dawley rats induced with the carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) [12]. Furthermore, Yamamoto et al. reported that only 2 % of _Porphyra tenera_, _L. religiosa or L. japonica_ var ochotensis is necessary to obtain the same protective effect [13]. In accordance, wakame_ (Undaria pinnatifida)_ and mekabu (sporophyll of wakame) have been showed to reduce the incidence, multiplicity and size of breast tumors in female Sprague-Dawley rats induced with DMBA [14, 15]. Considering that wakame and mekabu is particularly rich in iodine, Funahashi et al. suggested that the cancer inhibition was brought about by the iodine. A number of studies have reported the importance of iodine in the treatments for mammary gland dysfunctions. Iodine deficiency have been demonstrated to alters the structure and function of mammary gland in virgin rats, and iodine components (I2) is effective in diminishing ductal hyperplasia and perilobular fibrosis secondary to this iodine deficiency [16]. Similarly, I2 treatment of patients with benign breast disease is accompanied by a significant bilateral reduction in breast size, which further leads to a remission of disease symptoms. The importance of I2 in the treatments for mammary gland dysfunctions has been corroborated in human and animal models [17].

Dioxinodehydroeckol (Fig. 8.2a), a phloroglucinol derivative from _Ecklonia cava,_ has a potential inhibitory effect against growth of human breast cancer cells MCF-7 via induction of apoptosis [18]. One µg/ml mekabu strongly induced apoptosis in three human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7, T-47D, and MDA-MB-231), the induction of apoptosis even greater than 5-fluorouracil, a chemotherapeutic agent frequently used in human breast cancer clinics. More recently, fucoxanthin (Fig. 8.2b) the brown pigment which colors kelp and other brown seaweeds induced strong cytotoxicity against breast cancer MCF-7 cells with IC50 = 11.5 _μ_g/ml [19]. In addition, sulfated polysaccharides derived from brown algae , fucoidan (Fig. 8.2c) induced apoptosis in breast cancer 4T1 cells through down-regulation of VEGF. Furthermore, intraperitoneal injection of fucoidan in mice breast cancer models reduced the tumor volume and weight significantly [20]. The enhanced antitumor efficacy was associated with decreased angiogenesis and increased induction of apoptosis. Apoptosis is a key process in cancer development and progression which can be characterized through distinct set of morphological and biochemical progresses. Inactivation of apoptosis has been considered to be one of six fundamental hallmarks of cancer; therefore, apoptosis is a major target of cancer therapy development up to present [21]. Hence, development of molecules derived from marine algae which promote apoptosis in breast cancer cells by targeting both the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways may lead to the development of effective breast cancer therapies.


Chemical structures of seaweeds derived-bioactive molecules. Dioxinodehydroeckol (a); fucoxanthin (b); fucoidan (c); ι–carrageenan (d); 1-(3′,5′-dihydroxyphenoxy)-7-(2″,4″,6-trihydroxyphenoxy)-2,4,9-trihydroxydibenzo-1,4-dioxin (e)

### 8.2.2 Anti-Estrogen Dependent Cancers

Estrogen-dependent cancers are among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in American female [22]. Increased incidence of these cancers is predicted in the future, and the need for primary prevention is clear. Epidemiological studies demonstrated that estrogen dependent breast cancers (ER+) are among the highest in Western, industrialized countries, while rates are much lower in China and Japan [23, 24]. Due to some research study, low estrogen-dependent cancers rates have been attributed to the soy-rich and seaweeds diets inherent among Asian populations [25]. As an example, dietary intake of _Alaria esculenta_ (L) and soy protein has been reported to modify estrogen and phytoestrogen metabolism in healthy postmenopausal female [25]. In another female pilot study, Skibola et al. demonstrated that intake of _Fucus vesiculosus_ (bladderwrack) significantly increased the total number of days of the menstrual cycle, reduced circulating 17_β_-estradiol levels, and elevated serum progesterone levels in premenopausal female with abnormal menstrual cycling histories [26]. Moreover, _F. vesiculosus_ have been demonstrated to modulate endocrine hormones in female sprague-dawley rats and human luteinized granulose cells [27]. Hence, it may assumed that intake of seaweeds may contribute to the lower estrogen circulating level which may correlate to the lower incidence of hormone-dependent cancers in female.

Cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in female worldwide and more female die annually because of cervical cancer rather than from AIDS [28, 29]. It is the principal cancer of female in most developing countries, where 80 % cases occur [29]. Recent reports demonstrated that several marine algae species: _Palmaria palmate_ (dulse), _Laminaria setchellii, Macrocystis integrifolia, Nereocystis leutkeana, Udotea flabellum and Udotea conglutinate_ extracts were able to inhibit cervical cancers cell proliferations _in vitro_ [6, 30, 31]. Fundamentally, cancer is the increase in tumor cell number, and thus tumor burden, which ultimately accounts for the adverse effects on the host. The goal of most current cancer therapy is to reduce the number of tumor cells and to prevent their further accumulation. Hence, anti-proliferative activity of marine algae in cervical cancer cells demonstrated potential of marine algae as therapeutic agent for cervical cancer treatment.

Additionally, formation of cancer cells in human body can be directly induced by free radicals and natural anticancer drugs as chemopreventive agents have gained a positive popularity in treatment of cancer. Therefore, seaweed derived-radical scavenging molecules such as phlorotannins , carotenoids, sulfated polysaccharides and carmamol derivatives can be used indirectly to reduce cancer formation in the female body. Antioxidant activity of seaweeds and its bioactive molecules have been determined by various methods such as ferric thiocyanate (FTC), thiobarbituric acid (TBA), 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging, 2,2′-azinobis-3-ethylbenzothizoline-6-sulfonate (ABTS) radical scavenging effect, singlet oxygen quenching activity, lipid peroxide inhibition, superoxide radical and hydroxyl radical scavenging assays [1].

Seaweeds and seaweed derived-metabolites have shown promising anticancer activities and hence, seaweeds have a great potential to improve female health by being a part of anticancer functional foods and nutraceuticals. However, future studies focusing on the synergistic benefits of consuming different seaweeds, intake timing, recommended amounts of seaweeds consumption, and preparation methods for seaweeds is needed to maximize the desired protective effect in cancer managements.

### 8.2.3 Anti-human Papilloma Virus as a Prevention of Cervical Cancer

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is a sexually transmitted virus from the papillomavirus family. HPV infections of the cervix and vagina have emerged as the most common sexually transmitted diseases among young sexually active populations. In the US, an estimated 75 % of the reproductive-age populations have been infected with genital strains of HPV [32]. HPV Infection by certain HPV types (especially 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 55, 58, 59 and 68 types) in female genital has been associated with cervical cancer and cervical dysplasia [33, 34]. For this reasons, the diagnosis of symptomatic genital warts caused by the HPV and HPV prevention strategies have skyrocketed during the last three decades.

The first generation of HPV vaccine is currently available on the market to prevent HPV infection [35]. However, high cost of vaccine has been a cause for concern and will be too expensive for use in the developing world. Moreover, there is considerable uncertainty about the most effective strategy for vaccination and the likely impact of vaccination on HPV and cancer incidence [34]. Therefore, the search for potential anti-HPV candidates containing higher inhibitory activity and fewer prices has rise great interest in pharmaceutical industries. In this regard, natural bioactive compounds and their derivatives are potential source for the development of functional foods as new generation anti-HPV therapeutics which is more effective, less side effects and less expensive.

Seaweeds contain significant quantities of complex structural sulfated polysaccharides which have been demonstrated as potent inhibitors of wide variety of viruses, including [36–38]. Carrageenan, a sulfated linear polysaccharides of d-galactose and 3,6-anhydro-d-galactose extracted from the _Rhodophyceae_, has been used in food products for centuries. Recently, carrageenan has been shown to bear anti-HPV activity _in vitro_ [36]. Buck et al. noted that carrageenan particularly ι–carrageenan (Fig. 8.2d) inhibit HPV three orders magnitude more potent than heparin, a highly effective model for HPV inhibitor [29]. Carrageenan acts primarily by preventing the binding of HPV virions to cells and block HPV infection through a second, post attachment heparin sulfate-independent effect. Those mechanism is consistent by the fact that carrageenan resembles heparin sulfate, which is known as HPV-cell attachment factor. Furthermore, some of milk-based products block HPV infectivity _in vitro_, even when diluted million-fold [39]. In another study, carrageenan has been reported to inhibit genital transmission of HPV in female mouse model of cervicovaginal [40, 41]. Carrageenan was able to generate antigen-specific immune responses and antitumor effects in female (C57BL/6) mice vaccinated with HPV-16 E7 peptide vaccine [42].

Carrageenan can be an alternative source of novel therapeutic candidate for HPV by being a part of food additives. There are numerous advantages of carrageenan over other classes of anti-HPV agents, such as relatively low production costs, broad spectrum of anti-HPV properties, low cytotoxicity, safety, wide acceptability and novel modes of action, suggest carrageenan are promising candidates in the near future.

### 8.2.4 Anti-Obesity as Cancer Prevention Strategies

Obesity is a major risk factor for developing cancer, roughly equivalent of tobacco use, and both are potentially reversible. Around one-fifth of cancer deaths in the United States are associated with obesity. Further, obese cancer patients do worse in surgery, with radiation or chemotherapy. While the links among obesity, diabetes and heart disease are well-known, there is considerably less public awareness that obesity is also directly tied to several cancers. These include some of the toughest to treat: postmenopausal breast; cervical; ovarian; colon and rectal; endometrial, esophageal; thyroid; gallbladder; kidney; and pancreatic cancer. Studies also show higher recurrence and mortality rates for overweight and obese patients and survivors.

Obesity may occur in any gender; however, it is more likely to occur in female [43, 44]. Females of industrialized and developing countries are experiencing increases in the prevalence of obesity, diabetes, and high cholesterol [45, 46]. A detrimental effect of obesity on female reproductive system has also been demonstrated consistently. Furthermore, it is reported that media and socio-cultural continues to pressures young female to be thin which promotes body dissatisfaction, eating disturbance, depression and negative effect in young female [47]. Therefore, female may pay a higher health price for obesity. Despite these increases and detrimental effect, prevention opportunities exist to improve female’s health during their reproductive years and beyond and to improve the health of future generations. Many categories of natural and synthetic compounds which demonstrated as anti-obesity drugs have been used by female to reduce their weight. However, synthetic anti-obesity agents are believed to have certain side effects such as unacceptable tachycardia, hypertension, improve lipid blood levels, improve glucose metabolism and disturbance of female reproductive system [48]. Hence, more scientific efforts have been dedicated to study medicinal foods that can act as anti-obesity agents.

In the last four decades, researchers have found that soluble dietary fibers are negatively associated with obesity. Seaweeds is particularly rich two different types of fiber, soluble and insoluble (Table 8.1). As an example, _Eisenia bicyclis_ contains more than 50 % soluble fiber of its dry weight; the other brown algae species, _Fucus vesiculosus_ contained more than 40 % insoluble fiber per dry weight [49, 50]. In human body, soluble and insoluble fiber acts in a very different way. Consumption of marine algae soluble fiber such as carrageenan, agar, and alginate are primarily associated with hypocholesterolemic and hypoglycemic effects [52]. Alginates consumptions have been shown to modulate appetite and energy intake in human models of acute feeding. Upon reaction with gastric acid (acid-soluble calcium source), alginates undergo ionic gelation to form an alginate gel that can slow gastric emptying, stimulate gastric stretch receptors and reduce intestinal nutrient uptake and influence the glycaemic response [53]. In accordance, ingesting calcium-gelled, alginate-pectin twice per day has been reported to reduce spontaneous food intake in overweight and obese female [54]. Hence, the use of alginate to address the features important in the development of overweight and obesity is therefore shown to be clinically effective. Furthermore, insoluble fiber such as cellulose, xylans, mannans are associated with excretion of bile acids, increase fecal bulk and decrease intestinal transit time [2, 55]. Previous studies have also suggested that seaweed polysaccharides may be used at fat substitute in a range of food applications in order to produce an end-product with reduced total fat content, while still allowing for a product with improved moisture retention and consistency. The use of seaweed polysaccharides has been shown to facilitate the production of low fat versions of meat-based, starch-based, fat-based and fruit/vegetable-based products [56].




Maeda et al. reported that dietary intake of fucoxanthin significantly attenuates the weight gain of white adipose tissue (WAT) and expressed Uncoupling Protein 1 (UCP1) in diabetic/obese KK_A_ _y_ female mice [57, 58]. The potential involvement of fucoxanthin in attenuate the weight gain of WAT may correlate to the presence of unusual double allenic bonds at C-7′ position [59]. WAT is the predominant type of adipose tissue and commonly calles “fat” in mammals [60]. Besides its role in energy storage, WAT is now recognized as an endocrine and active secretory organ through its production of biologically active mediators termed, adipokines [61]. Excess production of adipokines includes proinflammatory factors and chemokines, has been linked with obesity and plays an important role in the development of obesity related disease. Therefore, fucoxanthin activity to attenuate the weight gain of WAT in female mice demonstrated potential of fucoxanthin for the prevention and treatment of obesity and diabetes particularly in female subject. Dioxinodehydroeckol and 1-(3′,5′-dihydroxyphenoxy)-7-(2″,4″,6-trihydroxyphenoxy)-2,4,9-trihydroxydibenzo-1,4-dioxin (Fig. 8.2e), two phloroglucinol derivatives isolated from _E. cava_ have significantly inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells suggesting its potential use as a functional ingredient in obesity managements [62].

Seaweeds may serve as a potential candidate of functional foodstuffs for obesity management. Hence, negative effect in female subject particularly to prevent cancer can be minimized by the application of seaweeds and seaweeds-derived bioactive materials in functional foods, nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals. Additionally, seaweeds may develop as a new approach for the treatment of obesity in addition to currently available anti-obesity agents. Therefore, seaweeds would be a potent natural source for the development of foods and pharmaceuticals for the cancer prevention in female subject.

## 8.3 Conclusions

The wide range of biological activities associated with bioactive materials derived from seaweeds such as phlorotannins , alginates, sulfated polysaccharides and carotenoids have potential to expand its nutritional and health beneficial value of seaweeds in food industries. Seaweed and seaweed-derived bioactive materials enrichment not only benefit the nutritional value of a food product, but also benefit the product in terms of improving the shelf-life and in some cases actually improving the sensorial properties. Furthermore, the wide diversity of seaweeds and numerous undiscovered unique metabolites present in seaweeds are interesting sources to increase numbers of novel functional foods which beneficial for cancer in female subjects. Accordingly, possibilities of designing new medicinal foods or nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals for cancer prevention derived from seaweeds are promising. As such, nutrition or health researchers should collaborate early on with food technologists/food industry in order to design and develop suitably appealing products with these ingredients. Although side effects of seaweed and seaweed-derived functional ingredients have been limited in chronic animal and short-term clinical studies, sustained clinical trials are needed to establish the safety of seaweeds at anticancer doses.
