# Legume Consumption and Breast Cancer Risk in Puerto Rico: The Atabey Study

## Abstract

Objective: There is evidence that lignans, high in phytoestrogens, are associated with decreased breast cancer (BrCa) risk. We assessed dietary intake of legumes around the time of menarche (12 – 13y) and in adulthood (1-year prior) in relation to risk in a Puerto Rican (PR) population with high intake of legumes. Methods: In the Atabey Study, a population based, case-control study of women 30-79y residing in the San Juan, PR, Metropolitan Area, we conducted in-person interviews among 317 cases and 348 controls, including assessment of dietary intake of legumes, using a culturally-specific, semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire.  Results: Intake of legumes was not significantly associated with breast cancer risk. For adult intakes, there was a non-significant increase in risk for lower legume consumption (adjusted OR 1.26, 95% CI 0.84-1.89) for the lowest tertile compared to the highest tertile (P trend = 0.08). Results were similar for analyses of adult intakes stratified on menopausal status. For reported adolescent legume intake, the adjusted OR (95% CI) was 1.24 (0.81-1.90) for intake below the median compared to above (P = 0.33). Conclusion: Higher legume intake during adulthood or at 12-13y old was not significantly associated with BrCa risk in this population with high legume intake. Further analyses are needed to better describe potential roles of fiber, total lignan and other food components in relation to BrCa prevention in this Hispanic population. Funded in part by DOD CDMRP, BC060131 