# Heating of vegetable oils influences the activity of enzymes participating in arachidonic acid formation in Wistar rats

## Abstract

Dietary intake of lipids and their fatty acids profile influence many aspects of health. Thermal processing changes the properties of edible oils and can also modify their metabolism, e.g. eicosanoids formation. The aim of our study was to verify whether the activity of desaturases can be modified by lipids intake, especially by the fatty acids content. The experimental diets contained rapeseed oil (RAP), sunflower oil (SUN) and olive oil (OL), both unheated and heated (for 10 min at 200°C each time before administration), influences the fatty acids composition in serum and the activity of enzymes participating in arachidonic acid (AA) formation. The activity of desaturases were determined by measuring the amounts of AA formed _in vitro_, derived from linoleic acid (LA) as determined in liver microsomes of Wistar rats. In addition, the indices of âˆ†6-desaturase (D6D) and âˆ†5-desaturase (D5D) have been determined. To realize this aim the method of high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) has been used with UV/VIS detection. Diet supplementation with the oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids affects the fatty acids profile in blood serum and the activity of Î”6\- and Î”5-desaturases in rat liver microsomes, the above activities being dependent on the kind of oil applied. Diet supplementation with heated oils has been found to increase the amount of AA produced in hepatic microsomes, and in the case of RAP and SUN, it has also increased D6D activity.