# Biological activities of fermented soybean paste (Doenjang) prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans during fermentation

## Abstract

To produce _doenjang_ with enhanced biological activities, _doenjang_ was prepared by fermenting regular soybeans (RS), germinated soybeans (GS), and germinated black soybeans (GBS) for 90 days. The isoflavone contents in GS and GBS-_doenjang_ were slightly higher than in RS-_doenjang_ in the early stage of fermentation. The DPPH radical scavenging activity of GBS-_doenjang_ was highest at 70.00% after 30 days of fermentation. The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibiting effects increased as the fermentation period progressed, and were significantly (_p_&lt;0.05) higher in GBS-_doenjang_ (58.69%) than in other preparations after 75 days of fermentation. The greatest fibrinolytic activities were 127.59 and 100.00% in nontreated GBS-_doenjang_ and GBS-_doenjang_ treated for 30 min at 55°C, respectively. There were significant (_p_&lt;0.05) correlations between the total isoflavone content and the antioxidant activity (0.779) and between the isoflavone content and the ACE activity-inhibiting effects (0.669). GBS-_doenjang_ exhibited greater antioxidant activities, ACE-inhibition, and fibrinolytic activities than RS and GS-_doenjang_.

### Keywords


Food Sci. Biotechnol. 23(5): 1533-1540 (2014) DOI 10.1007/s10068-014-0209-y RESEARCH ARTICLE Biological Activities of Fermented Soybean Paste (Doenjang) Prepared Using Germinated Soybeans and Germinated Black Soybeans during Fermentation Hyeong-Eun Kim and Yong-Suk Kim Received November 30, 2013; revised March 4, 2014; accepted March 7, 2014; published online October 31, 2014 © KoSFoST and Springer 2014 Abstract To produce doenjang with enhanced biological activities, doenjang was prepared by fermenting regular soybeans (RS), germinated soybeans (GS), and germinated black soybeans (GBS) for 90 days. The isoflavone contents in GS and GBS-doenjang were slightly higher than in RS- doenjang in the early stage of fermentation. The DPPH radical scavenging activity of GBS-doenjang was highest at 70.00% after 30 days of fermentation. The angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE) inhibiting effects increased as the fermentation period progressed, and were significantly (p&lt;0.05) higher in GBS-doenjang (58.69%) than in other preparations after 75 days of fermentation. The greatest fibrinolytic activities were 127.59 and 100.00% in non- treated GBS-doenjang and GBS-doenjang treated for 30 min at 55ºC, respectively. There were significant (p&lt;0.05) correlations between the total isoflavone content and the antioxidant activity (0.779) and between the isoflavone content and the ACE activity-inhibiting effects (0.669). GBS-doenjang exhibited greater antioxidant activities, ACE-inhibition, and fibrinolytic activities than RS and GS- doenjang. Keywords: doenjang, germinated, black soybean, ACE, fibrinolytic Introduction Soybeans are a common raw material in traditional Korean fermented foods. It has been well documented that isoflavones in soybeans can eradicate harmful active oxygen species. Isoflavones not only exhibit antioxidant and anticancer activities, but also aid in prevention of hormone-related diseases, such as menopausal syndrome, osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, breast cancer, prostate cancer, and colorectal cancer, due to an estrogen-like activity (1-3). Black soybeans (Rhynchosia nolubilis) are often more palatable because of anthocyanin pigments in the skin, in addition to nutritional components. Black soybeans also have stronger antioxidant effects and contain more isoflavones than regular soybeans. It has been shown that the anthocyanins contained in black soybeans are natural water soluble pigments that produce a red-purple color and a high biological activity level (4). Historically, black soybeans have been largely used as health-functional foods. Plant seeds require proper levels of temperature, moisture, and oxygen to germinate. Also, seed biological activities increase upon germination and cause changes in the seed composition. In particular, soybeans exhibit decreases in protein and fat contents due to breathing and metabolism associated with the process of germination. The contents of isoflavones are increased or decreased according to the stage of germination (5) and changes can be observed in nutritional factors and biologically active substances. Doenjang (fermented soybean paste) is a representative traditional Korean fermented food that has played an important role in providing protein in typically grain- centered, protein-scarce diets. Doenjang shows higher isoflavone activity levels than other soybean-based fermented foods (4) in the form of aglycones, which result from hydrolysis of glycosides. Doenjang is an excellent source of isoflavones, based on a study in which doenjang exhibited higher absorption rates and more biological applicability than glycosides (6). Hyeong-Eun Kim, Yong-Suk Kim ( ) Department of Food Science and Technology, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Jeonbuk 561-756, Korea Tel: +82-63-270-2567; Fax: +82-63-270-2572 E-mail: kimys08@jbnu.ac.kr 1534 Kim and Kim Recently, many studies have been conducted on the functional, nutritional, and non-nutritional components of soybeans, which have been associated with biological activities of anti-cancer, anti-aging, and anti-hypertension (7). In particular, as with the adult diseases of hypertension, arteriosclerosis, and hyperlipidemia, the causes are closely related to patient eating habits. Thus, developing functional foods that maximize the biological activity of common ingredients can contribute meaningful solutions to the problems of disease prevention (7). In particular, the functionalities of doenjang can be observed in specific by- products, such as the various peptides and amino acids generated during the fermentation and maturation periods of soybeans, rice, and wheat (8). It is important to note that the raw materials used in producing doenjang have a critical role in determining the functionalities of doenjang. In this study, changes in the biological activities of germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans were observed and compared. Changing isoflavone contents antioxidant activities, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)- inhibiting effects, and fibrinolytic activities during fermentation were studied due to an interest in producing doenjang with enhanced biological activities. Materials and Methods Materials and reagents Regular soybean (‘Taekwang’, yellow soybean) and black soybean cultivars (‘Cheongja #3’) produced in the autumn of 2011 in Sunchang, Jeonbuk, Korea were used for doenjang preparation. The isoflavone standards of daidzein, genistein, and glycitein for analysis of the isoflavone contents were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). The NaCl, HCl, KH 2PO 4, sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), methanol, and ethyl acetate for analysis were obtained from Junsei Chemical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). Tween 80 and Tween 20 were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. All standard solutions for testing were filtered through a 0.2 µm syringe filter (Chrom Tech. Inc., Apple Valley, MN, USA) prior to HPLC. Soybean germination Regular and black soybeans were washed and soaked in distilled water at 20ºC for 5 h. Then, beans were drained, soaked in 0.3 M NaCl at 20ºC for 5 h (5,9), and germinated for 48 h at 20ºC and 85% relative humidity using an incubator (Universal Scientific Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea). Germinated regular and black soybeans were used for meju (a kind of koji) preparation. Koji preparation Non-glutinous rice was soaked in distilled water for 12 h at 20ºC, drained, and steam-heated (Autoclave WAC-100; Daihan Scientific Co., Wonju, Korea) for 30 min at 121ºC. The koji was then cooled to approximately 30ºC, inoculated with a 3% (v/w) spore suspension of Aspergillus oryzae (Hagyeong Fermentation Research Center, Suwon, Korea) and incubated for 5 days at 25ºC (10). The spore suspension was prepared by homogenizing (Ultra Turrax T25 Homogenizer; Ika, Staufen, Germany) spores using 10 mL of 0.1% peptone water (Difco, Detroit, MI, USA) containing 0.1% Tween 80 in the plate count agar medium (Difco). Meju preparation For preparation of 3 types of doenjang, 3 types of meju were prepared with using regular soybeans (RS), germinated soybeans (GS), and germinated black soybeans (GBS, germinated soybean:germinated black soybean=7:3, w/w). The meju was prepared following methods previously described by Oh et al. (10). Soybeans were germinated and steam-heated (NK steaming bottle; Daeyul Industry, Daejeon, Korea) for 30 min at 121ºC, then cooled to 30ºC. For meju fermented with A. oryzae (Hakyeong Fermentation Research) and Bacillus subtilis (Daesang Foods Co., Sunchang, Korea), steam heated soybeans were inoculated with a 0.5% (v/w) B. subtilis culture medium (Difco) together with 0.5% (v/w) non- glutinous rice koji prepared using A. oryzae, then the meju was mixed and molded into bamboo trays (18×10×3 cm). Meju fermented using A. oryzae (Hakyeong Fermentation Research) and B. subtilis (Daesang Foods Co.) were fermented for 12 days at 28ºC, and then dried for 3 days in a drying room. The meju was finely ground using waring blender (Waring, Hartford, CN, USA) to pass through a 425 µm sieve (Laboratory Test Sieve; Endecotts Ltd., London, UK) for subsequent analysis. Doenjang preparation The mixing ratio of raw ingredients for preparation of doenjang was obtained from traditional methods of the Sunchang region (Korea) (11). The ground powder of each of the 3 meju types, purified salt (Hanjusalt, Ulsan, Korea), and tap water was mixed in 33:13:54 ratios (12). A total of 15 kg of each mixture was used to fill an onggi (traditional Korean earthenware pottery) and fermentation was performed for 90 days at 25ºC in an incubator (Universal Scientific Co., Ltd.). Samples were analyzed at 15 day intervals. Determination of isoflavone contents The isoflavone content of doenjang was analyzed using HPLC (5). For analysis of the daidzein, glycitein, and genistein components of isoflavones, 0.5 g of freeze-dried finely ground sample powder was put into a test tube to which 7.5 mL of 1 N HCl was added. The solution was then mixed using a vortex mixer (Vortex-2 Genie; Scientific Industries, Inc., NY, USA) and incubated 90 min at 100ºC for complete conversion of glucoside to aglycones. The solution was Biological Activities of Doenjang 1535 cooled to room temperature and HPLC grade methanol (Fisher Scientific Korea, Ltd., Seoul, Korea) was added to reach a final volume of 25 mL. The solution was mixed using a stirrer (Corning PC-420D; Corning Inc., Tewksbury, MA, USA) for 6 h and centrifuged at 3,202×g for 10 min (Beckman, Brea, CA, USA). Extracts were filtered through a 0.2 µm syringe filter (Chrom Tech. Inc.) before analysis using a Futecs HPLC system (Futecs Co., Ltd., Daejeon, Korea). The HPLC system (Futecs), which consisted of a model NS-6000A auto-sampler, a model NS-2004GP pump, and a model NS-2100D UV/visible detector, was used to analyze each sample. A Supelcosil LC-18 column (250×4.6 mm, 5 µm; Supelco Inc., Bellefonte, PA, USA) was used. The mobile phase composed of acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific Korea, Ltd.) and 0.05 M KH 2PO 4 (25:75, v/v) was used at the same ratio during all analyses. The injection volume was 20 µL, the flow rate was 1.2 mL/min at 40ºC, and the UV absorbance was monitored by spectrophotometer (UV-1800; Shimadzu Co., Kyoto, Japan) at 254 nm. Analyses were repeated 3 times. Sample preparation for measurement of antioxidative activity Freeze-dried doenjang (5 g) was ground using waring blender (Waring) and then extracted with 20 mL of distilled water using shaking incubator (VS-8480; Vision Scientific, Daejeon, Korea) at 160 rpm, 30ºC for 3 h. Extracts were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 30 min (Beckman). The resulting supernatant liquid was used as a doenjang extract solution. DPPH radical scavenging activity The DPPH radical scavenging activity was analyzed using a DPPH (Sigma Chemical Co.) ethanol (Fisher Scientific Korea, Ltd.) solution (13). Extracts to be tested (0.6 mL) were added to 2.4 mL of a 0.4 mM DPPH solution dissolved in absolute ethyl alcohol (Fisher Scientific Korea, Ltd.), and mixed (Vortex-2 Genie; Scientific Industries, Inc.) for 10 s. After 10 min, the absorbance at 526 nm was measured using a spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Co.). Control samples contained distilled water instead of an extract. The DPPH radical scavenging activity was calculated as a percentage of DPPH discoloration using the formula: DPPH radical scavenging activity (%) =(1–Absorbancesample/Absorbancecontrol)×100 Antioxidant activity of linoleic acid (AOA) To measure the antioxidant activity, a linoleic acid emulsion was prepared by mixing a solution containing 50 mL of a 0.2 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0), 0.2804 g of linoleic acid (Sigma Chemical Co.), and 0.2804 g of Tween 20. The extract to be tested (1 mL) was added to 2 mL of the linoleic acid emulsion and mixed (Scientific Industries, Inc.) for 10 s. After acidification by incubating for 15 h at 37ºC for 15 h at 37ºC in an incubator (Universal Scientific Co., Ltd.), the acidified solution was added to 6 mL of 60% methanol and the absorbance was measured at 234 nm using a spectro- photometer (Shimadzu Co.) (12). Control samples contained distilled water instead of extracts. The antioxidant activity was calculated as a percentage using the formula: AOA (%)=(1–Absorbancesample/Absorbancecontrol)×100 ACE activity inhibiting effects The ACE inhibition activity was determined using the method previously described by Cheung and Cushman (14) with slight modification. Freeze-dried doenjang (20 g) was extracted using 20 mL of distilled water at 95ºC for 20 min. An amount of 20 mL of distilled water was added to aqueous extracts, followed by centrifugation at 10,000×g for 20 min (Beckman). Then, 0.05 mL of the supernatant from centrifugation, combined with 0.05 mL of Hip-His-Leu (Sigma Chemical Co.) was pre-incubated for 5 min at 37ºC. The reaction was initiated by adding 0.05 mL of ACE (Sigma Chemical Co.) and terminated by adding 0.25 mL of 1 N HCl after 1 h of incubation. After addition of 1.5 mL of ethyl acetate, the sample was centrifuged at 5,000×g for 10 min (Beckman) and 1 mL of the supernatant was dried using dry oven (Universal Scientific Co., Ltd.) at 80ºC for 15 min, then dissolved in 3.0 mL of 1 M NaCl. The absorbance was measured by spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Co.) at 228 nm to evaluate the degree of inhibition of the ACE activity. The inhibitory activity (%) was represented as: [(Ec-Es)/(Ec-Eb)]×100, where Es is the absorbance of the sample solution, Ec is the absorbance of the control solution to which the buffer solution was added instead of the sample, and Eb is the absorbance of a blank solution to which the reaction stop solution was added in advance. Fibrinolytic activity The fibrinolytic activity of doenjang was analyzed using the method described previously by Oh et al. (9) with slight modification. Doenjang (20 g) was shaken with 90 mL of distilled water, centrifuged at 12,000×g for 20 min (Beckman), and then the supernatant was examined. The supernatant was heated using water bath (Changshin Scientific Co., Seoul, Korea) at 55ºC for 30 min and 100ºC for 30 min to separate out proteases and inhibitors. The pH was adjusted to pH 3.0 using addition of 1 N HCl, and the sample was centrifuged (Beckman) at 12,000×g for 15 min before adjustment of the pH to 8.0 using addition of 1 N NaOH. Treated extracts were centrifuged at 12,000×g for 15 min (Beckman) and the supernatant liquor was used as a sample solution. Fibrinogen (Sigma Chemical Co.) was dissolved in a 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.8) with inclusion of 0.15 M NaCl to a final 1536 Kim and Kim concentration of 0.5%, followed by addition of thrombin (100 NIH unit; Sigma Chemical Co.). Mixtures were solidified in Petri dishes for 1 h at room temperature prior to use. In order to examine the fibrinolytic activity, an aliquot of each sample (20 µL) was spotted on fibrin plates followed by incubation at 37ºC for 18 h. The diameter of a clear zone was measured and the fibrinolytic activity (units/mg) was determined using a parallel standard curve based on the standard plasmin (1.0 unit/mL; Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA). The activity was calculated as: Fibrinolytic activity (%) =(cleared zone of sample/cleared zone of plasmin)×100 Statistical analysis All statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (Statistical Analysis System 9.3; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) (15). Mean values and standard deviations (SD) were calculated, and Duncan’s multiple range tests were applied. All experiments were performed in triplicate. A probability (p) level of 0.05 was considered to be significant. Results and Discussion Isoflavone contents Isoflavone contents in doenjang produced using germinated soybeans (GS) and germinated black soybeans (GBS) are presented in Table 1. The major isoflavones in doenjang were daidzein and genistein. The contents of isoflavones decreased as the length of the fermentation period increased. Also, GS-doenjang and GBS-doenjang exhibited a slightly higher content of isoflavones than RS-doenjang in the early stage of fermentation, probably attributable to germination of soybeans. Studies performed by Jeon et al. (16) showed that the isoflavone content of soybeans increased due to germination. Additionally, Shi et al. (17) reported that the content of isoflavones increased in the early stage of soybean germination, decreased after that period, then the contents increased again in the last stage of germination. The content of daidzein gradually decreased from 33.77- 37.83 mg/100 g in the early stage of germination to 29.87- 32.22 mg/100 g after 90 days of germination. RS-doenjang contained the least daidzein, GS-doenjang contained the most, and GBS-doenjang levels were in between, but with no significant (p&gt;0.05) differences between the preparations. The content of genistein, which has been shown to inhibit cancer cell growth (18), gradually decreased from 37.72, 41.30, and 34.63 mg/100 g in the early stage of fermentation in RS-doenjang, GBS-doenjang, and GS-doenjang, respectively, to 32.49, 30.72, and 27.36 mg/100 g, respectively, after 90 days of germination. GBS-doenjang contained the lowest genistein levels with no significant Table 1. Changes in the isoflavone contents of doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans Group Fermentation period (day) Isoflavone (mg/100 g) 1) Daidzein Glycitein Genistein Regular soybeans 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 37.83±2.58 36.77±1.92 37.08±0.81 37.99±2.62 39.47±3.15 33.49±1.29 32.22±2.13 9.47±0.53 10.84±0.84 10.51±0.73 9.02±0.87 8.56±0.65 7.81±0.26 7.25±0.68 37.72±2.49 36.10±2.45 36.09±0.86 38.45±2.18 36.79±2.23 30.74±1.07 32.49±4.49 Germinated soybeans 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 37.45±2.73 42.74±2.42 38.80±3.56 36.39±3.74 37.50±3.96 30.69±2.12 29.87±0.13 11.35±0.81 9.00±0.04 9.79±0.33 8.63±0.05 8.61±0.61 7.09±1.15 7.95±0.18 41.30±1.06 37.58±1.91 39.31±1.75 33.14±2.09 35.43±3.79 30.02±1.43 30.72±0.82 Germinated black soybeans 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 33.77±1.48 37.20±2.69 36.65±2.89 34.82±2.17 36.67±2.41 30.99±2.62 30.92±3.35 12.82±0.23 9.02±0.45 8.58±0.59 8.47±0.90 8.11±0.95 8.28±0.34 7.22±0.23 34.63±1.60 34.17±0.52 37.79±1.56 32.02±0.61 34.80±0.87 26.07±0.73 27.36±2.30 1)Data are mean±SD (n=3). Biological Activities of Doenjang 1537 difference between the other preparations. The contents of daidzein and genistein were similar, as in the report of Kim and Yoon (2) in which the daidzein and genistein contents were detected 538±59 and 538±57 mg/kg, respectively, in doenjang. However, these results of this study were different from results reported by Lee et al. (8) in which the daidzein and genistein contents of sword bean and general soybean pastes were 179.8-466.3 and 51.2-233.8 mg/kg, respectively. The total isoflavone contents of raw soybeans in this study were 125.04, 149.04, 126.96, and 154.94 mg/100 g (data not shown) for RS, black soybean, GS, and GBS, respectively, and the total isoflavone content of doenjang tended to be lower (81.22-90.11 mg/100 g) with no significant difference than the contents of raw soybeans. The results of this study were similar to results reported by Jang et al. (19) where the total content of isoflavones in raw soybeans (3,137± 174 mg/kg) were decreased by 1,849±23 mg/kg due to steeping and steaming. DPPH radical scavenging activity DPPH is a stable free radical that is commonly used to evaluated the ability of compounds to act as free radical scavenger or hydrogen donors and to measure the antioxidant activity (1). Results of a comparison of antioxidant activities based on an electron donating ability in doenjang are shown in Fig. 1. The electron donating ability of GBS doenjang was increased from 44.96% at day 0 to 67.18% at day 15 of fermentation. RS-doenjang, GS-doenjang, and GBS-doenjang all exhibited the highest values of antioxidant activities (50.00, 55.14, and 70.00%, respectively) after 30 days of fermentation. The results of this study were similar to the results reported by Park et al. (3) in which the removal rates of free radicals, measured using DPPH and ABTS, in doenjang produced using black soybeans increased after 50 days of fermentation, then gradually decreased afterwards. In particular, the GBS-doenjang group after 15, 30, and 45 days of fermentation exhibited significant (p&lt;0.05) differences in DPPH radical scavenging activities, compared to the other test groups, and showed the highest electron donating ability. In addition, a study (20) in which the antioxidant activity was measured in doenjang produced by mixing of black soybeans and regular soybeans with a specific ratio, showed high DPPH radical scavenging activity levels, compared with other doenjang types that were produced using only black soybeans. It was estimated that the high electron donating ability levels in doenjang using black soybeans was due to the color causing ingredients of the black soybeans, which were used as raw materials. In a study that investigated the antioxidant effects of Korean soybeans (21), black soybeans and garbanzo beans showed higher antioxidant activities than yellow soybeans. Also, the antioxidant effects of garbanzo beans, black soybeans, and small black soybeans were higher than for yellow soybeans. The soybean skin had been removed from the beans in this previous report, thus showing antioxidant effects similar to the whole bean. This leads to the conclusion that the electron donating abilities of germinated black soybean doenjang are due to the color causing components in the skin of black soybeans. AOA Results of AOA measurements in doenjang extracts are shown in Fig. 2. AOA values were 29.45-38.34% in the early stage of fermentation, then decreased for all test groups. The highest AOA value in all treatments after 45 days of fermentation was GBS-doenjang at 45.81%, similar to the electron donating ability, a higher activity level than previously reported (12). The AOA value for doenjang produced using a mold (as distinct from Fig. 1. Changes in the DPPH radical scavenging activities of doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans. -■-, soybeans; -●-, germinated soybeans; -▲-, germinated black soybeans; a-c indicate statistically significant differences in the same fermentation period. Vertical bars represent the SD (n=3). Fig. 2. Changes in the antioxidant activities of doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans. -■-, soybeans; -●-, germinated soybeans; -▲-, germinated black soybeans; a-c indicate statistically significant differences in the same fermentation period. Vertical bars represent the SD (n=3). 1538 Kim and Kim Fig. 3. Change in the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibiting activities of doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans. -■-, soybeans; -●-, germinated soybeans; -▲-, germinated black soybeans; a-b indicate statistically significant differences in the same fermentation period. Vertical bars represent the SD (n=3). traditional Korean meju, which is a lump of fermented soybeans) was 17-27%. In a study on the antioxidant effects of Korean soybeans (21), colored soybeans, like garbanzo beans and black soybeans, exhibited a much higher level of antioxidant activity than yellow soybeans. Colored soybeans also showed higher effects than yellow soybeans for all uses, based on the results of an investigation of the peroxide content performed by adding soybean skins to a linoleic acid emulsion (21). Base on AOA values, GBS-doenjang showed the highest anti- oxidant functions and electron donating abilities due to the presence of the antioxidants genistein, gentisic acid, γ- tocopherol, and anthocyanins in the skin of soybeans. ACE activity inhibiting effects ACE is an enzyme that plays a role in transforming the C-terminal dipeptide (His- Leu) of angiotensin into an active type of angiotensin II (8). Results of a comparison of ACE activity inhibiting effects during fermentation of GS-doenjang and GBS- doenjang are shown in Fig. 3. The ACE activity inhibiting effects gradually increased from 35.70-48.57% in the early stage of fermentation to the highest level of expression of 50.38-58.69% after 75 days of fermentation. GBS-doenjang showed significant (p&lt;0.05) differences in effects, compared to RS-doenjang and GS-doenjang, and GBS-doenjang showed the highest ACE activity inhibiting effects after 75 days of fermentation, higher than results reported by Rhee et al. (22) in which Lentinus edodes added to Korean traditional doenjang exhibited ACE activity inhibiting effects of 24.98-45.76%. In addition, the effect of GBS- doenjang was similar to results of a study (8) in which sword beans added to doenjang showed ACE activity inhibiting effects of 32.7-63.1%. GBS doenjang showed higher ACE activity-inhibiting effects than all other test preparations. Fibrinolytic activity Fibrinolytic activity measurements for GS-doenjang and GBS-doenjang fermented for 90 days are shown in Table 2. The different protease and protease inhibitors contained in soybeans constitute an obstacle in separation of fibrinolytic enzymes from soybeans. Therefore, thermal and acidic treatments were applied to separate the inhibitors from proteases before measuring the fibrinolytic activities (1). All untreated RS-doenjang, GS-doenjang, and GBS-doenjang preparations showed high fibrinolytic activity levels. There was no activity in thermally treated doenjang at 100 oC for 30 min and the pH was maintained at 3.0. This result was similar to the report Oh et al. (1) in which garden beans showed an initial fibrinolytic activity of 1.1 unit/mL after heat treatment at 100ºC for 10 min, followed by an activity decrease of 0.5 unit/mL after a thermal treatment at 100ºC for 30 min. The fibrinolytic activities of GBS-doenjang showed the highest level (100%) with no treatment, and were 127.59% after 30 min of treatment at 55ºC, which was significantly different (p&lt;0.05), compared to other treatments based on a reference of the plasmin 1 unit as 100%. Because the fibrinolytic enzymes in fermented foods can be directly obtained by ingestion, effective results in preventing cardiovascular diseases can be expected. In addition, these findings provide the necessary basis for production of high value, functional foods and facilitation of consumption of Table 2. Fibrinolytic activity of doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans (Plasmin 1 unit: 100%) Relative fibrinolytic activity (%) Group Heat treatment Untreated pH control 55 oC, 30 min 100 oC, 30 min pH 3.0 Regular soybeans 115.40±2.05 b1) 88.51±2.36 b ND ND Germinated soybeans 118.39±6.24 b 91.95±4.71 ab ND ND Germinated black soybeans 127.59±4.08 a 100.00±7.07 a ND ND 1)a-bMean values with different superscripts in the same column are significantly different (p&lt;0.05); ND, not detected Biological Activities of Doenjang 1539 Table 3. Correlation between the isoflavone content, DPPH radical scavenging activity, AOA, ACE inhibition, and fibrinolytic activity of 90 day fermented doenjang prepared using germinated soybeans and germinated black soybeans based on Pearson correlation analysis 1) ACE inhibition AOA DPPH scavenging activity Fibrinolytic activity Isoflavone ACE inhibition NA 0.554 0.408 -0.493 0.669 AOA 0.554 NA 0.623 -0.497 0.779 DPPH scavenging activity 0.408 0.623 NA -0.336 0.509 Fibrinolytic activity -0.493 -0.497 -0.336 NA -0.337 Isoflavone 0.669 0.779 0.509 -0.337 NA 1)The values are R 2; NA, not analyzed; +, positive correlation; -, negative correlation; p&lt;0.05 traditional Korean fermented foods (23). Correlations Relationships between the total isoflavone content, the electron donating ability based on DPPH and AOA, ACE activity inhibiting effects, and fibrinolytic activities in GS-doenjang and GBS-doenjang after 90 days of fermentation are shown in Table 3. There were significant correlations between the total isoflavone content and the AOA value (R 2=0.779, p&lt;0.05) and between the isoflavone content and ACE activity inhibition (R 2=0.669, p&lt;0.05). There were no correlations between the electron donating ability and the fibrinolytic activity, determined using DPPH, and other results. The results of this study were different from results reported by Kim et al. (24) where the electron donating ability of cheonggukjang (fermented unsalted soybean paste) showed a correlation with the phenol content and SOD-like activities, and no correlations with the isoflavone content, fibrinolytic activities, or ACE activity inhibiting effects. Differences were probably due to fermentation microbe differences between cheonggukjang fermented using Bacillus subtilis and doenjang fermented using A. oryzae and B. subtilis. Results of the present study showed that doenjang prepared using germinated black soybeans (germinated soybean:germinated black soybean=7:3) showed greater antioxidant activities, ACE activity-inhibiting effects, and fibrinolytic activities than regular soybean doenjang. Therefore, doenjang with enhanced biological activities can be prepared using germinated black soybeans. Disclosure The authors declare no conflict of interest. References 1. Oh HS, Park YH, Kim JH. Isoflavone contents, antioxidative, and fibrinolytic activities of some commercial cooking-with-rice soybeans. Korean J. Food Sci. Technol. 34: 498-504 (2002) 2. Kim JS, Yoon S. Isoflavone contents and β-glucosidase activities of soybeans, meju, and doenjang. Korean J. Food Sci. Technol. 31: 1405-1409 (1999) 3. Park SS, Oh SH, Choi WD, Ra KS, Suh HJ. Change in physiochemical properties during the fermentation of deonjang prepared with black soybeans. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 12: 234-241 (2007) 4. Kwak CS, Lee MS, Park SC. Higher antioxidant properties of chungkookjang, a fermented soybean paste, may be due to increased aglycone and malonylglycoside isoflavone during fermentation. Nutr. Res. 27: 719-727 (2007) 5. Jeong PH, Shin DH, Kim YS. Effects of germination and osmoproming treatment on enhancement of isoflavone contents in various soybean cultivars and cheonggukjang (fermented unsalted soybean paste). J. Food Sci. 73: H187-H194 (2008) 6. Shin DH. Functionality of soy fermented food and changes of manufacturing technology. Korea Soybean Dig. 21: 49-63 (2004) 7. Kim TW, Kim YH, Jung HJ, Park CS, Kim HY. Screening of strains with fibrinolytic activity and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitory activity from deonjang. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 21: 581-585 (2012) 8. Lee HT, Kim JH, Lee SS. Comparison of biological activity between soybean pastes adding sword bean and general soybean pastes. J. Fd. Hyg. Safety 24: 94-101 (2009) 9. Oh HS, Kim JH, Lee MH. Isoflavone contents, antioxidative and fibrinolytic activities of red bean and mung bean. Korean J. Soc. Food Cookery Sci. 19: 263-270 (2003) 10. Oh BH, Kim YS, Jeong PH, Shin DH. Quality characteristics of gochujang meju prepared with Aspergillus species and Bacillus subtilis. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 15: 549-554 (2006) 11. Kim HE, Han SI, Jung JB, Ko JM, Kim YS. Quality characteristics of doenjang (soybean paste) prepared with germinated regular soybean and black soybean. Korean J. Food Sci. Technol. 43: 361- 368 (2011) 12. Kim JH, Yoo JS, Lee CH, Kim SY, Lee SK. Quality properties of soybean pastes made from meju with mold producing protease isolated from traditional meju. J. Korean Soc. Appl. Biol. Chem. 49: 7-14 (2006) 13. Blois MS. Antioxidant determination by the use of a stable free radical. Nature 181: 1199-1200 (1958) 14. Cheung HS, Chushman DW. Spectrometric assay and properties of angiotensin-converting enzyme of rabbit lung. Biochem. Pharmacol. 20: 1637-1640 (1971) 15. SAS Institute, Inc. SAS User’s Guide. Statistical Analysis Systems Institute, Cary, NC, USA (1990) 16. Jeon HY, Seo DB, Shin HJ, Lee SJ. Effect of Aspergillus oryzae- challenged germination on soybean isoflavone content and antioxidant activity. J. Agr. Food Chem. 60: 2807-2814 (2012) 17. Shi H, Nam PK, Ma Y. Comprehensive profiling of isoflavones, phytosterols, tocopherols, minerals, crude protein, lipid, and sugar during soybean (Glycine max) germination. J. Agr. Food Chem. 58: 4970-4976 (2010) 18. Wei H, Wei L, Frenkel K, Bowen R, Barnes S. Inhibition of tumor promoter-induced hydrogen peroxide formation in vitro and in vivo by genistein. Nutr. Cancer 21: 113 (1994) 19. Jang CH, Park CS, Lim JK, Kim JH, Kwon DY, Kim YS, Shin DH, Kim JS. Metabolism of isoflavone derivatives during manufacturing of traditional meju and doenjang. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 17: 422-445 (2008) 20. Kim SY, Son HS, Oh SH. Characteristics of Korean soybean paste 1540 Kim and Kim (doenjang) preparation by the fermentation of black soybean. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 14: 134-141 (2009) 21. Bae EA, Moon GS. A study on the antioxidant activities of Korean soybeans. J. Korean Soc. Food Sci. Nutr. 26: 203-208 (1997) 22. Rhee CH, Kim WC, Rhee IK, Lee OS, Park HD. Changes in the physicochemical property, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitory effect and antimutagenicity during the fermentation of Korean traditional soy paste (doenjang). Korean J. Food Preserv. 13: 603- 610 (2006) 23. Radnaabazar C, Park CM, Kim JH, Cha J, Song YS. Fibrinolytic and antiplatelet aggregation properties of a recombinant cheonggukjang kinase. J. Med. Food 14: 625-629 (2011) 24. Kim MH, Kim SY, Jeong DY, Kim YS. Biological activities of cheonggukjang prepared with several soybean cultivars. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 21: 475-483 (2012) 
