# Fish and seafood availability in markets in the Baie des Chaleurs region, New Brunswick, Canada: a heavy metal contamination baseline study

## Abstract

The consumption of halieutic products has many health benefits. However, their contaminants loads need to be addressed to better understand the risk from consuming these products. The aquatic biota from the Baie des Chaleurs in New Brunswick is contaminated by cadmium, zinc and lead. In spite of this, no study has examined the heavy metal concentrations in commercial halieutic products sold in this Canadian region. The objective of this pilot study was to characterize the species and origin of fish and seafood sold in the Baie des Chaleurs region by using an ecosystemic approach. Additionally, a baseline picture of the heavy metal levels found in these products has been determined. In 2008, interviews were carried out in markets located in the Baie des Chaleurs area. Species that were identified as the most purchased were then bought for analysis. Samples were freeze-dried and homogenized before nitric acid digestions. Aluminum, copper, cadmium, iron, manganese, and zinc concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry. Results show that 36 % of seafood species sold in markets were caught in the Baie des Chaleurs. Lobsters, shrimps, scallops and oysters are the most purchased species regardless of the season. High amounts of cadmium exceeding tolerable daily intake are found in lobster hepatopancreas and can cause deleterious effects on health, in particular in vulnerable populations such as children and heavy consumers. The ecosystemic approach to health used in this pilot study shows the feasibility of an exhaustive study on the exposure of coastal population to heavy metal from fish and seafood consumption and the source of halieutic products sold in markets.

### Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.​1007/​s11356-012-1134-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

### Keywords

Ecosystemic approach to health Consumer products Contamination Fish consumption Halieutic product Lobster Risk assessment

## Introduction

Fish and seafood, which are part of a healthy diet, bioaccumulate heavy metals. In particular, the bioaccumulation of cadmium (Cd), arsenic (As), manganese (Mn), mercury (Hg), and lead (Pb) in the trophic food chain is cause of concern since they can have deleterious effects on human health (Watanabe et al. 2003; Wright and Mason 2000; Mason et al. 1995; Jarup and Akesson 2009; Ersoy and Celik 2009; Martí-Cid et al. 2007). Furthermore, fish and seafood are one of the main links between heavy metal present in the environment and human exposure (Verbeke et al. 2005; Burger and Gochfeld 2009).

The Baie des Chaleurs region is a rural area of New Brunswick where lives approximately 100,000 inhabitants. The economy of this region is based on fishery, tourism, forestry and heavy industries (BAHS 2005; Government of New Brunswick 2010; Hilderbrand 1984). Most of the heavy industries such as a lead smelter and petroleum-fuelled thermal power plants are known for their heavy metal releases in the environment. These industries are located in three industrial centers of the Baie des Chaleurs: Dalhousie, Belledune and Bathurst (Fraser et al. 2011; Hilderbrand 1984). In particular, Dalhousie has high levels of Hg, while Belledune has high levels of Cd, Pb and zinc (Zn) in sediments and aquatic biota (Bourgoin 1990; Bourgoin et al. 1991; Garron et al. 2005; Uthe et al. 1982; Matheson and Bradshaw 1985; Pilgrim and Hughes 1994; Fraser et al. 2011).

Coastal communities depending on fishery resources, like the Baie des Chaleurs population located in northeastern New Brunswick and the Gaspésie peninsula in Québec, Canada, are more vulnerable to contamination since they tend to consume more fish than the general population (Chien et al. 2002; Health Canada 2007a). Previous studies of halieutic products fished in the Baie des Chaleurs showed heavy metal contamination (Cd, Hg, Pb, and Zn) near industrial sites (Garron et al. 2005; Fraser et al. 2011; Bourgoin et al. 1991). These studies focused on species fished directly in the Baie des Chaleurs (Bourgoin 1990, 1991; Garron et al. 2005; Uthe et al. 1982; Matheson and Bradshaw 1985; Pilgrim and Hughes 1994; Fraser et al. 2011) and overlooked fish from markets where most of people buy their fish (Burger and Gochfeld 2005; Amiard et al. 2008).

Higher incidents of some cancers and other health problems (respiratory, circulatory, digestive, and endocrine) have been reported in the Baie des Chaleurs region compared to other New Brunswick regions (Department of Health 2007; Milewski and Liu 2009; BAHS 2005). This has created concerns in the local population concerning their exposure to regional pollutants. Exposure studies often try to link local ecosystem to human health (Ullrich et al. 2007; Burger et al. 2007; Cui et al. 2005; Rodrigues et al. 2007; Dolbec et al. 2000). However, with the globalization of food systems, fishes sold in markets do not necessarily come from the Baie des Chaleurs. Ecosystemic approach to health takes into account complexity and system thinking as a way to address social determinants of health while also fostering ecosystem sustainability (FAO 2003; Waltner-Toews and Kay 2005; Forget and Lebel 2001). Use of an ecosystemic approach to health, i.e., looking at and characterizing fish and seafood available in markets and groceries, can starts to address social and environmental determinants of exposure to contaminants via fish and seafood consumption. This approach adds an additional layer of complexity through visualization of the globalization of the food system. It addresses issues of concerns to the local population, places the community as an integral part of the ecosystem, and takes into account the environment as a complex dynamic system composed by several scales (local, regional, global, etc.).

To better understand the link between local ecosystem and exposure to heavy metal of human population from their seafood and fish consumption, this study aims to: (1) determine the types and origins of halieutic products sold, and (2) establish an overview of heavy metal contamination of principal species of fish sold in Baie des Chaleurs stores and also begins to address social and environmental determinants of exposure to contaminants via fish and seafood consumption.

## Materials and methods

### Subject recruitment and halieutic products sampling

Since most people buy their halieutic products from groceries or fish markets, merchants were chosen to make the link between the halieutic industries and local population as they can provide insight of the consumption habits of communities.

In August and October 2008, markets from different municipalities selling halieutic products located along the Baie des Chaleurs in New Brunswick were visited in order to present the project to managers or owners. Eight markets, divided equally between groceries and fish markets, have accepted to take part to the study. All stores were located between Dalhousie and Caraquet and gave a good spatial representation of the different communities in the Baie des Chaleurs region. After informed consent was given, a short interview with the person responsible for purchasing halieutic products was conducted to obtain information about: (1) the store, (2) their customers and (3) the species and the origins of halieutic products sold. Fish and seafood were then bought based on what species sell the best and their availability. Information about the fish and seafood bought, such as their origins, the part of the fish (filet, whole fish…) and the mode of preservation were recorded (see questionnaires annexed). All steps of this study were approved by the ethical committee of the Université de Moncton.

For heavy metal analysis, a total of 42 fresh samples and 17 canned products of fish and seafood were bought from market. Also, nine lobsters were purchased in summer 2006 directly from fishermen on the wharf of three localities of the Baie des Chaleurs region (Belledune, New Mills and Salmon Beach).

### Heavy metal analysis

Fish and seafood samples were collected and stored individually in sterile polyethylene scintillation vials at −20 °C as follow: (1) for fish and crustacean, pieces of flesh were took; (2) for lobster, hepatopancreas, claw and tail tissues were sampled; (3) for shrimps, oysters, mussels and scallops, samples from the same market, origin and species were pooled; (4) the content of each canned products was mixed and homogenized. Ten percent of all samples were analyzed in triplicate. All samples were freeze-dried and homogenized before analysis. Samples were digested using the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) method 3050B which consist to a concentrated nitric acid digestion at 95 °C followed by a 30 % hydrogen peroxide treatment (USEPA 1996). Aluminum (Al), copper (Cu), Cd, Fe, Mn, and Zn concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (Varian 725-ES) at Environment Canada laboratory (Moncton, Canada) (APHA 1998; USEPA 1994a, b, 2007). All glass equipment was cleaned with 10 % nitric acid and stainless steel tools were used for dissection. Before each analysis, a calibration curve was made and standards (5–1,000 μg/L) were continually verified. Certified reference material, DORM-2 and DORM-3, blanks, sampling triplicates, and analysis duplicates were used to validate the concentrations obtained (Table 1). Results respect all quality assurance and quality control criteria.


Comparison of measured and certified concentrations of heavy metals in two certified reference materials and sampling triplicates and analysis duplicates recoveries  





### Statistical analysis

The answers from the interviews and information on product purchased have been compiled by simple statistics such as percentages and means. In order to obtain a representation of concentrations of heavy metal found in fish and seafood, results are presented as geometric means, which compensate for the skewing effect of very high levels and the small sample number of each species. When concentrations were under the detection limit, half the limit was used to perform statistics (Chase et al. 2001; Burger and Gochfeld 2004). Since number of individual replicates can be low and may contribute to high standard deviation, each species was organized into four separate categories according to their taxonomic rank in order to allow statistical comparisons. Lobster hepatopancreas and shrimp form distinct categories. ANOVA tests were performed in order to compare heavy metal concentration for each category. Heavy metal concentrations were log-transformed to respect the normality and homogeneity of residuals of the statistical model, which were tested with a Shapiro–Wilk test. The statistical differences were established to _p_ &lt; 0.05. To detect where differences lie between categories, the Tukey–Kramer test was used. SAS System for Windows 9.00 was used for all statistical analyses (SAS Institute Inc. 2002).

### Risk assessment

To assess the risks to health from exposure to heavy metals, the Joint FAO/WHO Export Committee on Food Additives established, for each metal, an “estimated maximum amount of an agent expressed on a body mass basis, to which individuals in a (sub)population may be exposed daily over their lifetimes without appreciable health risk” (IPCS 2004). This value can be expressed in micrograms per kilogram of body weight per day [provisional tolerable daily intake (PTDI)] or per week [provisional tolerable weekly intake] (JECFA 1982, 1983, 1989, 2006; GDWQ 2004). Table 2 presents PTDIs of analyzed heavy metals. We calculated the maximum tolerable concentration that food may contain for an adult (70 kg) or child (35 kg), which eat two servings (150 g) as recommended by Canada’s Food Guide or five servings (375 g) per week (high consumers) without exceeding PTDIs of each heavy metal. These values, presented in Table 2, were used as the base of comparisons to evaluate the possible exposure to heavy metal from halieutic products.


Maximum heavy metal concentrations (μg/g) calculated for an adult and a child eating two and five servings per week using the WHO’s PTDI  





## Results and discussion

This pilot study gives an overview of aquatic species sold in Baie des Chaleurs stores and their origin. It also reveals the major trends of heavy metal concentrations in fish and seafood bought in this region. The fish markets and groceries sampled offer a wide variety of fish and seafood from various part of the world, although the majority comes from Canada (78 %). Data show that over a third of species sold in fish markets visited come from Baie des Chaleurs and most of the clients are locals (57 %), although tourism increases customer traffic during the summer (Table 3). The most purchased species (all seasons considered) in markets visited, i.e., lobster, shrimp, scallop, and oyster, come mostly from the Baie des Chaleurs. Thus, it is probable that the percentage of fish and seafood coming from the Baie des Chaleurs, in term of quantity, is higher than the 36 % observed in term of number of species. It should be kept in mind that seasons influence best sellers species (Table 3, question c) and seems to follow commercial fishing season.


Main results from the interviews carried out with fish market or grocery store merchants  


aThis question was subdivided in five individual questions in the interviews, to separate seasonal and annual responses.

The results of the interview with merchants reflected the globalization of the food system. Groceries store tend to sell more fish and seafood from international origin (18 %) than local fish markets (5 %, Table 3). Moreover, canned products come mainly from countries outside Canada (81 % of canned products bought). This confirms the importance of determining the appropriate geographical range and using ecosystemic approaches to understand the provenance of the species that are currently consumed by inhabitants of the Baie des Chaleurs, especially when considering that people are not always informed of the origin of the products they buy. To get a better understanding of this globalization trend, we need to determine consumption and dietary habits of local populations of the Baie des Chaleurs.

This study shows that consumers rarely ask to the origin of the fish and seafood that they buy (75 %, Table 3). Origins of halieutic products sold are generally well known by merchants interviewed (89 % of species) but are not displayed (except one fish market). This phenomenon is not unique to the Baie des Chaleurs region; it was also observed in a study conducted in New Jersey by Burger et al. (2004). However, since fishing regions of commercial seafood products have different levels of heavy metal contamination, the provenance of fish and seafood and information regarding the contamination of halieutic products from these regions should be displayed. Together, this information would allow consumers to make informed choices about their consumption of fish and seafood (Scherer et al. 2008). This is important since fish consumption advisories are often normalized to an average meal intake of a large population (national) or recommended fish portions in a given time (such as Canada’s food guide) and are not adapted to local context (Scherer et al. 2008; Moya 2004; Marien and Stern 2005).

Socioeconomic, cultural, and regional characteristics can lead to higher consumption of fish and seafood and at the same time lead to greater exposure to contaminants (Moya 2004; Chien et al. 2002; Scherer et al. 2008; Marien and Stern 2005; Health Canada 2007a). For example, native people and fishermen tend to eat more fish than other groups (Burger 2002; Chien et al. 2002). Thus, since the Baie des Chaleurs is a coastal region, it is probable that the inhabitants eat more halieutic products per week then the Canada’s Food Guide minimum recommendation and therefore are more likely to be exposed to contaminants.

The risk assessment results for children (35 kg) and heavy consumers of halieutic products show the importance of considering vulnerable groups in risk assessment studies and not normalize to the general population only (70 kg and two servings per week) (Tables 2 and 4). Several values of heavy metal concentrations in fish and seafood are lower than our limits of detection, and, as such, were all well below the PTDIs (Tables 2 and 4). The detected levels of heavy metal from fish (Table 4) generally do not exceed PTDIs (Table 2), even for children who eat up to five servings (75 g/serving) of fish per week. Considering categories, only Cd concentrations in lobster hepatopancreas largely exceed PTDI for all groups (Fig. 1). This part of the crustacean is known for its high concentrations of Cd (Jarup and Akesson 2009). Studies suggest that chronic exposure to Cd can lead to bones and kidney diseases (Alfven et al. 2002; Jarup and Akesson 2009) as well as lungs and prostate cancer (Nawrot et al. 2006; Vinceti et al. 2007). High Cd concentrations in lobster hepatopancreas demonstrate the importance to consider the nature of the parts (tissues, organs) of fish and seafood consumed. Heavy metal concentrations in other species can also exceed some PTDIs criteria (Tables 2 and 4). It is the case of Al and Cd in canned mussels and Cd in canned oyster. In fact, seafood preserved in cans seems to have higher metal concentrations (Al, Cu, Fe, Mn, and Zn) compared to fresh seafood and to concentrations reported in other studies (Tables 4 and 5). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated in other types of canned products that metal contents can be higher (Tuzen and Soylak 2007). This suggests that preservation mode influences heavy metal concentrations in fish. It would be important to study heavy metal concentrations in fish and seafood before and after canning process.


Geometric mean and standard deviation of heavy metal concentrations (μg/g ww) in fish and seafood sold in the Baie des Chaleurs and sampled in 2008  



Geometric mean of heavy metal concentrations in fish and seafood sold in market from the Baie des Chaleurs. Species included in each category are presented in detail in Table 4. Hepatopancreas refer to lobster. _Different letters_ indicate significant differences between categories (_p_ ≤ 0.0001). For Cd, _each line_ represents WHO’s PTDI (Table 2) using the following criteria: _solid black line_ five servings per week—adult (70 kg), _broken black line_ five servings per week—child (35 kg), _solid gray line_ two servings per week—adult (70 kg), _broken gray line_ two servings per week—child (35 kg)


Heavy metal concentrations (μg/g ww) in fish and seafood reported in other studies  







Based on this pilot study, it was possible to identify species that offer low levels of metals and that are known to contain high concentration of fatty acids (omega-3), such as herring, sardine, trout, and salmon (Domingo et al. 2007; Huynh and Kitts 2009). Further studies on these species, including analyzing other types of contaminants, such as organochlorines, endocrine disruptors, dioxins, and furans, would allow a better understanding of the risk assessment of these species. It is to be noted that the Canada’s Food Guide also values these four species, in addition to mackerel and char, as good choices for health (Health Canada 2007a).

## Conclusion

This pilot study sets the foundation for using ecosystemic approaches to health by utilizing social aspects of food consumption (the diet of the general population and the availability of fish and seafood in markets) and examining heavy metal contamination throughout different scales. It demonstrates the feasibility and the necessity of more exhaustive studies on the exposure of coastal population in the Baie des Chaleurs to heavy metal from fish and seafood consumption. It also shows the importance of focusing studies on the source of halieutic products sold in markets and the link to the local ecosystem, as well as the impacts of seafood and fish consumption on the health of Baie des Chaleurs inhabitants. The current study also helps to established links with stakeholders of the Baie des Chaleurs, which is essential to this type of research where results need to be accepted and used by the communities.

In order to confirm the results obtained in this study, it will be essential to increase sample number. It is also important to study species that are more contaminated (lobsters, mussels), purchased by consumers (lobster, oysters, shrimp, and scallop) and preserved in canned (mussel and oyster). Moreover, the region where fish and seafood were caught should be taken into account since heavy metals exposure depends on these parameters (Mubiana et al. 2006; Braune 1987; Ranau et al. 2001; Fraser et al. 2011). To evaluate actual exposure of the local population, it will is essential to also determine diet habits (servings, cooking, species) of halieutic products by working with local inhabitants, including vulnerable groups such as children and fishermen. The ultimate goal of studies to follow is to develop tools to help local consumers make informed decisions about their fish consumption in order to balance health risks related to environmental pollutants and benefits of eating fish. This goal will ultimately be achieved by utilizing ecosystemic approaches to health that take into account scale, social, and environmental determinants of health, and through the involvement of local populations in each step of this research.

### Acknowledgments

We are thankful to merchants for their participation, Environment Canada for laboratory assistance and Dr G. Moreau for his help with data analysis. This work is financially supported by the New Brunswick Environmental Trust Fund, the Consortium National de Formation en Santé and the Programme Coopération New Brunswick—Québec of New Brunswick and Québec government.

## Electronic supplementary material


