# Breakdown of Summary of Carrots' effect on Breast Cancer

```
Summary generated using: $shovel3 query.concatConclusions 'breast cancer carrots site:ncbi.nlm.nih.gov' 40 includeReference=True
```

* An excess of energy intake, particularly from refined bread and pasta, can be an unfavourable feature of the Mediterranean diet, in the presence of a sedentary lifestyle.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10676554>
  * **Summary: This snippet was taken from a study investigating food consumption and its effect on cancers of the breast and rectum. Although they did not include this information in the conclusion section of the article, the researchers found that "only carrots and raw vegetables seemed to lower breast cancer risk." However, since this information was included in the results section (not the conclusion) this information was not picked up by the script.**

* Our results suggest that high intake of total vegetables, certain fruits, milk, and eggs may reduce the risk of breast cancer, while high consumption of animal-source foods may increase risk. The dietary associations did not appear to vary by ER/PR status.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3758811/>
  * **Summary:  This snippet was taken from a study investigating food consumption and its effect on cancers of the breast among Chinese women. This particular study found that in their test subjects, intake of carrots do not effect risk of breast cancer. However, they concede that a meta analysis of similar research papers on the topic do suggest that carrots decrease the risk of breast cancer. These two pieces of information can be found in the extended results section and in the discussion section of the article (not the abstract).**

* We observed no association between total fruit and vegetable intake and risk of overallbreast cancer. However, vegetable consumption was inversely associated with risk ofER− breast cancer in our large pooled analyses.Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) can beused to explain, in part, some of the differences in etiology, and clinical characteristics ofbreast cancer and survival rates among breast cancer patients (1–3). Breast tumors that express the ER (ER+tumors) are more strongly associated with hormone-related factors than tumors that do notexpress the ER (ER− tumors). Classic risk factors, such as late age at firstbirth and number of births, are more consistently associated with risk ofER+ breast cancer than with risk of ER− breast cancer(1). In addition, few risk factors have beenidentified for ER− breast cancer.Fruit and vegetable intake has been hypothesized to reduce the risk ofbreast cancer, but the current evidence is inconclusive. A recent meta-analysis of 14 cohortstudies reported a statistically significant 11% reduced risk of breast cancer overallcomparing high vs low fruit and vegetable intake; results were not reported for breast cancersubtypes defined by receptor status (4). Threecohort studies (5–7) have recentlyinvestigated the association between fruit and vegetable intake and risk of breast cancer byreceptor status. All three studies found that women who consumed higher levels of fruits andvegetables had a 32% to 50% lower risk of ER− breast cancer compared withwomen who consumed low levels of fruits and vegetables. In another cohort study that evaluatedonly dietary patterns, women consuming a high fruit or salad pattern were observed to have a45% lower risk of ER− breast cancer (8). Because the number of studies examining ER− breast cancer islimited, more evidence is needed to examine the role of diet in ER− breastcancer.One challenge in examining ER− breast cancer inepidemiologic studies is that ER− breast cancer accounts for only 15% to 20%of breast cancers (9). Thus, in most studies, thenumber of ER− breast cancer case patients is relatively low, which affectsthe power to detect modest associations with certainty.Therefore, with the advantage of a large number of case patients, weevaluated the relation between fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of breast cancer by ERstatus in a pooled analysis of 20 prospective cohorts. These analyses expand our prioranalyses of fruit and vegetable consumption and breast cancer risk (10) by including 12 more prospective studies and increasing thefollow-up time for most of the studies in the original analyses. In addition, only two of the20 studies in this pooled analysis have previously examined associations specifically withfruit and vegetable consumption and risk of ER− breast cancer (5, 6). Insecondary analyses, we examined tumors classified by progesterone receptor (PR) status.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3593764/>
  * **Summary: This study found "statistically significant inverse associations for intakes of apples/pears, peaches/nectarines/apricots, and strawberries, carrots, and lettuce/salad with risk of ER− breast cancer but non-statistically significant associations with risk of ER+ breast cancer." However, they found that when multiple foods from the above list are eaten together in a diet, none of the foods seem to better than any other. I.E. If a diet has at least some of the above foods, then you should be okay against breast cancer. A preventative diet does not need to include *all* of the above foods, just some of them. This information was found in the extended results section.**

* A diet characterized by a low P/S ratio seems to be more important for the development of breast cancer than total fat intake.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3611024/>
  * **Summary: This study looked at the effects of 4 different tanzanian diets on breast cancer risk. They found that a diet of Mchicha, cucumber, okra, onions, carrots, tomatoes, maize, fish and avocado had no significant impact on breast cancer risk after factoring in effects of socioeconomic parameters and reproductive variables into the logistic model. This information can be found in the extended results section of the article. However, since this study was studying a set of 4 diets, a scraper program would need to have the intelligence to find the name of the diet they used that contained carrots (the "Mchicha Diet"), then lookup the final results for that diet after taking into account confounding factors. However, all of this information can be found in the extended results section of the article.**

* The results from this study show that dietary soluble fiber intake is associated with a significantly reduced risk of ER− breast cancer among pre-menopausal women. Additional studies with larger sample size are needed to confirm these results.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3709253/>
  * **Summary: This study found that soluble fiber intake is associated with significantly reduced breast cancer risk for pre-menopausal women. No significant association was found for insoluble fiber intake. In the article's "Subjects and Methods: Interviews" section, the researchers say that based on a report by the US Institute of Medicine, carrots are a good source of soluble and insoluble dietary fiber. Thus, by extension, intake of carrots should yield preventative effects (this is my conclusion).**

* The role of vitamin supplements in preventing breast cancer still remains unclear, considering our review. Although biologic mechanisms exist to support the anticancer effects of vitamins, there is no clear evidence for an effect in cancer prevention for vitamin supplements. Further investigations are warranted to elucidate the mechanisms by which vitamin supplementation can modify breast cancer development.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3805144/>
  * **Summary: This article is a meta-study on vitamins intake and breast cancer risk. Carrots are not explicitly mentioned in the article body. However, there is a study in the bibliography that is about the effects of carrots and vitamin A on breast cancer risk. This article about carrots was only cited in the "Results: Vitamin A and beta-carotene" section of the article body. Both Vitamin A and beta-carotene are widly know to be chemicals found in high concentrations in carrots (according to WebMD). However, to get a clear conclusion from the article about carrots and prevention of breast cancer, one must read the discussion of the article. There, they state that results from Vitamin A are inconclusive since all but one of the studies they consulted have shown a tiny, but nonsignificant decrease in breast cancer risk. However, they also found one study that shows a *significant* correlation between Vitamin A and breast cancer risk (which the authors of this article explain might be caused by oxidative damage). Results from the results section of this article also show that long term intake of beta-carotene is associated with reduced risk for breast cancer in post-menopausal women. Thus, by extension, intake of carrots should probably yield somewhat preventative effects (this is my conclusion).**

* Overall, this study supports the feasibility of designing dietary interventions for stage II–IV ovarian cancer survivors and provides preliminary evidence that a low fat high fiber diet and a diet supplemented with encapsulated FVJC may increase phytonutrients in ovarian cancer survivors.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3278555/>
  * **Summary: This study was primarily aimed at finding new ways to increase carotenoid levels within the body. According to the study's discussion section, "Previous in vitro studies have demonstrated that carotenoids inhibit cell growth and malignant transformation and show antioxidant activity [17, 18]. Similarly, carotenoid intake may also affect estrogen metabolism by inhibiting estrogen-induced cell proliferation [32]. One study reported that higher levels of β-carotene modestly reduced the risk of ovarian cancer [19]. Recent studies of breast cancer survivors have shown that higher intake and exposure to carotenoids were associated with a reduction in second breast cancer events [33, 34]. Although we are uncertain whether higher carotenoid intake is associated with improved prognosis among ovarian cancer survivors, recent epidemiological studies suggest that this relationship is probable [8, 9]." Carrots are only mentioned once in the article body, but in a place where not much actionable information can be gained. Rather, *for this article to be useful, one would have to know that carrots are a very good source for carotenoids* and, thus, according to the article, must have preventative effects against breast cancer.**

* Ecologic associations between food availability and disease vary considerably on the basis of whether mortality or incidence rates are used in the analysis. Great care is thus necessary when interpreting our results.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3834285/>
  * **Summary: This study looked at multiple classes of dietary intake (fish, meat, vegetables, etc) on a high level against various health risks. Carrots were one of the foods in their vegetable class used for testing. In their discussion, they state that they found a positive association between consumption of "vegetable products, vegetable oils, and fish with breast cancer incidence [. However, this] contradicts the results of prospective studies and a recent review found no evidence of an association between these foods and breast cancer. Nevertheless, some of the observed associations are metabolically plausible. Low fruit consumption might increase breast cancer risk, because of low fiber intake." Therefore, carrot intake's effect on breast cancer is inconclusive based on this study.**

* These results suggest that the pentane-based fractions of DCOE possess potential anti-cancer activity that is mainly mediated through the Erk pathway.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/14/387>
  * **Summary: In the snippet above, DCOE stands for "Daucus carota oil extract," an extract of a wild carrot. In the background section of the article, the authors state that "Daucus carota L.ssp.carota (wild carrot), an herb used in folk medicine worldwide, was recently demonstrated to exhibit anticancer activity." Additionally, in the extended conclusion of the article, the authors state that "The results suggest that the wild carrot could be considered a potential source for natural anticancer compounds."**

* The study revealed that the risk factors for breast cancer among women in the Tabriz area of Iran are related to the lifestyle. Therefore, the provision of education to change unhealthy lifestyle choices and periodic check-ups for early breast cancer detection are recommended.Citation: Journal:None, Date:None
  * Link: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4197353/>
  * **Summary: In this article, intake of carrots were counted by the researchers as being part of total vegetable intake. In the "Abstract: Results" section of the article, the researchers state that "diet containing sufficient fruit and vegetables (OR, 0.22; 95% CI, 0.12-0.39) had protective roles against breast cancer."**
