# Dietary acrylamide and cancer risk: An updated meta-analysis

### Abstract

The debate on the potential carcinogenic effect of dietary acrylamide is open. In consideration of the recent findings from large prospective investigations, we conducted an updated meta-analysis on acrylamide intake and the risk of cancer at several sites. Up to July 2014, we identified 32 publications. We performed meta-analyses to calculate the summary relative risk (RR) of each cancer site for the highest versus lowest level of intake and for an increment of 10 µg/day of dietary acrylamide, through fixed-effects or random-effects models, depending on the heterogeneity test. Fourteen cancer sites could be examined. No meaningful associations were found for most cancers considered. The summary RRs for high versus low acrylamide intake were 0.87 for oral and pharyngeal, 1.14 for esophageal, 1.03 for stomach, 0.94 for colorectal, 0.93 for pancreatic, 1.10 for laryngeal, 0.88 for lung, 0.96 for breast, 1.06 for endometrial, 1.12 for ovarian, 1.00 for prostate, 0.93 for bladder and 1.13 for lymphoid malignancies. The RR was of borderline significance only for kidney cancer (RR = 1.20; 95% confidence interval, CI, 1.00-1.45). All the corresponding continuous estimates ranged between 0.95 and 1.03, and none of them was significant. Among never-smokers, borderline associations with dietary acrylamide emerged for endometrial (RR = 1.23; 95% CI, 1.00-1.51) and ovarian (RR = 1.39; 95% CI, 0.97-2.00) cancers. This systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies indicates that dietary acrylamide is not related to the risk of most common cancers. A modest association for kidney cancer, and for endometrial and ovarian cancers in never smokers only, cannot be excluded.


















Epidemiological evidence on the relation between dietary acrylamide and the risk of several cancers has continued to accumulate during the last few years, after the publication of our first systematic review and meta-analysis on acrylamide and human cancer.[1] Recently, several data have been released from large cohort studies,[2-11] including--among others--the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) and the Nurses' Health Study (NHS). In particular, the EPIC study, including over 500,000 participants, reported results for esophageal,[2] pancreatic[3] and endometrial[4] cancer. An increased risk of esophageal cancer (on the basis of 341 cases) emerged in subjects with intermediate levels as compared to low acrylamide intake, but no significant association was found for a high intake (hazard ratio, HR = 1.41; 95% confidence interval, CI, 0.86-2.71).[2] No association emerged for pancreatic cancer, based on 865 incident cases, the HRs being 0.77 (95% CI, 0.58-1.04) for high versus low intake and 0.95 (95% CI, 0.89-1.01) for an increase in acrylamide intake of 10 µg/day.[3] The analysis of endometrial cancer, including 1,382 cases--627 of which were type-I--found no overall association with acrylamide (HR = 0.98; 95% CI, 0.78-1.25), but a positive one for type-I endometrial cancer in the subgroup of women who never smoked and never used oral contraceptives (HR = 1.97; 95% CI, 1.08-3.62).[4]

The NHS considered the relation between dietary acrylamide and breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer.[5] The study included 6,301 cases of breast, 484 of endometrial, and 416 of ovarian cancer. While no association emerged with breast cancer (relative risk, RR = 0.95; 95% CI, 0.87-1.03, for high _vs_. low intake), the risk was increased for endometrial (RR = 1.41; 95% CI, 1.01-1.97) and, to a lower extent, ovarian cancer (RR = 1.25; 95% CI, 0.88-1.77).[5] A subsequent nested case-control analysis including data from the NHS I and II considered the relation between acrylamide exposure, as measured by hemoglobin adducts, and ovarian cancer risk, providing no evidence of association (RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.50-1.24 for highest _vs_. lowest tertile of acrylamide adducts).[6]

Our earlier extensive systematic review and meta-analysis on acrylamide and cancer included data of both dietary and occupational exposures published until June 2009.[1] That meta-analysis found no increase in risk of most types of cancer in relation to acrylamide exposure. Since for several cancer sites the number of cases available from epidemiological studies on dietary acrylamide is now more than doubled, and given the continuing debate on the issue, we updated the quantitative meta-analysis on dietary acrylamide intake and cancer risk.

### Material and Methods

The methods used are similar to those described in our earlier meta-analysis.[1, 12] In the current investigation, however, the interest was focused on the estimate of total dietary acrylamide only, because: (_i_) there are no new relevant data from occupational studies, and (_ii_) studies considering specific foods/food groups (_e.g_., fried potatoes and chips, coffee, _etc_.) are no longer relevant, given the accumulating number of investigations providing estimates of total dietary acrylamide. In July 2014, we performed a systematic literature search in the Medline database, using PubMed, without restrictions according to language, using the following search string: (acrylamide OR glycidamide) AND (cancer OR neoplasm OR tumor) AND (diet OR dietary OR food OR foods). Since the literature search of our earlier meta-analysis was conducted in June 2009, we limited our search to the period 2009-2014\. A similar search was conducted in EMBASE, using the same keywords and over the same search period. Potentially relevant articles were retrieved and assessed. Those that were not in the scope for this review were excluded (_e.g_., animal studies, studies aimed at reducing the quantity of acrylamide in specific foods, toxicity studies, studies not focused on cancer risk, _etc_.). Abstract and unpublished studies were also excluded. None of the selected, relevant articles was published in a language other than English. No studies were excluded _a priori_ for weakness of design or data quality, and we did not assign quality scores to the studies. A total of 105 publications were identified in the PubMed search and 203 in the EMBASE search. A first selection, mainly based on the title and abstract of the publications, was performed to exclude those studies that were clearly nonrelevant (according to the criteria described above), and 59 publications were retained for further consideration. These were abstracted and reviewed in detail. Among them, 46 did not report original epidemiological results on dietary acrylamide and cancer and were no longer considered, whereas the remaining 13 publications were retained for the review.[2-5, 7-11, 13-16] These were added to the previously selected 19 publications on dietary intake of acrylamide,[17-35] for a total of 32 publications.

We reviewed all the studies selected and abstracted the following information in a standard format: study design; country; cancer sites; number of cases and person-years (or noncases, or controls), overall and according to each level of acrylamide intake; sex; data categorization (_i.e_., quartiles or quintiles); mean (or median) acrylamide intake in each category among controls; relative risk estimates (rate ratios, HRs, odds ratios, collectively referred to as RR) and the corresponding 95% CI; and additional results from subgroup analyses.

A few publications reported duplicate results from the same populations. A population-based case-control study conducted in Sweden provided early results on dietary acrylamide intake and risk of cancers of the colorectum, bladder and kidney.[30] In a subsequent letter,[17] the authors provided updated results based on a more comprehensive estimate of acrylamide intake (_i.e_., including additional data on coffee drinking). The latter RRs were thus used for the main meta-analyses. Still, data from the first report[30] were used in subgroup analyses on smoking status, as the corresponding results were not available in the subsequent letter. Two publications[13, 20] provided results on acrylamide and colorectal cancer using data from the Netherlands Cohort Study (NCS). We included in the meta-analysis the estimates from the first publication that was based on a larger number of cases and a longer follow-up period.[20] Also, two publications from the NCS were focused on breast cancer.[10, 19] We included in the meta-analysis the estimates from the second publication,[10] that had an extended follow-up period and a larger number of cases.

Two publications reported the RRs and 95% CIs as figures only.[17, 18] The exact RR estimates for colorectal, bladder cancer,[17] and for renal cell cancer[18] could be retrieved (Prof. Lorelei Ann Mucci, personal communication) and were used in the meta-analyses, while the RR estimate for kidney cancer[17] and the corresponding 95% CI were no longer available and were thus derived from Figure 2 of Ref. [17] and from Figure 1 of Ref. [18].

When at least two independent risk estimates on dietary acrylamide exposure were available for a specific cancer site, we performed a meta-analysis and calculated pooled RR estimates, and the corresponding 95% CIs, for high versus low level of exposure and for an increment of 10 µg/day of dietary acrylamide. For the latter, when the RR for an increment of 10 µg/day of dietary acrylamide was not available from the original analysis, we estimated it using a method proposed by Greenland and Longnecker, which relates the natural logarithm of the RR to the corresponding mean value of acrylamide intake across exposure categories,[36, 37] taking into account that risk estimates for subsequent levels of intake are correlated. When data on number of subjects in each level were not available, we ignored the correlation between estimates and calculated the dose-risk slopes using variance-weighted least squares regression.

To obtain the summary RRs for high versus low exposure and, separately, for an increment of 10 µg/day of dietary acrylamide intake, we pooled the corresponding RR estimates according to a fixed-effects model using the inverse variance method (_i.e_., computing an average effect by weighting the log RR of each study according to the inverse of their sampling variance), when the test for heterogeneity between estimates was not significant (_i.e_., _p_ &gt; 0.10), or to a random-effects model, which considers both within- and between-study variations, using the DerSimonian and Laird method [_i.e_., using the sum of the inverse of the variance of the log (RR) and the moment estimator of the variance between studies as weights], when the test for heterogeneity between estimates was significant (_i.e_., _p_ ≤ 0.10).[38, 39] Heterogeneity between estimates was assessed using the _χ_2 test. For cancer sites with at least four published studies, we also computed summary estimates in subgroups of study design (cohort and case-control studies) and smoking habit (when sufficient data were available), and according to menopausal status and hormone receptor status for breast cancer. Given the small number of studies providing relevant results across separate strata, we did not perform meta-analyses on subsets of risk estimates defined according to sex, body mass index or other potential effect modifiers. All the statistical analyses were performed using the STATA package (version 11; StataCorp, College Station, TX).

### Results

Table 1 shows the main characteristics and results of the 32 publications that provided data on dietary acrylamide and cancer risk. The publications and their results are ordered by cancer site (according to the International Classification of Diseases) and publication year. Several publications reported risk estimates for more than one cancer site and/or subtype, or separately by sex. Therefore, a total number of 64 estimates for high versus low acrylamide intake and 71 estimates for the continuous measure of intake are given in Table 1. Separate RR estimates for various cancer subtypes (_i.e_., oral cavity and oro and hypopharynx,[16] or specific lymphoid malignancies[7]) were pooled, in order to obtain a single RR to be included in the meta-analysis of the corresponding cancer site (_i.e_., oral cavity/pharynx and lymphoid malignancies, respectively).[40] No meta-analysis was conducted for brain and thyroid cancer (only one estimate available). Therefore, a total number of 55 estimates were included in the meta-analyses of dietary acrylamide and risk of cancer at various sites.  


Table 2 gives, for each cancer site examined, the number of available estimates (at least two) and the corresponding total number of cases, together with the summary RR and 95% CI for both a categorical (_i.e_., high _vs_. low level) and a continuous (_i.e_., for 10 µg/day increase) measure of acrylamide intake. All the RR estimates for high versus low level of intake were close to unity, six were below, seven above unity and one equal to 1.00. Except for kidney cancer (1,802 cases), that showed a borderline significant increased RR (1.20; 95% CI, 1.00-1.45) for high versus low acrylamide intake using a fixed-effects model (_p_ for heterogeneity = 0.16), there was no other significant association. When we repeated the meta-analysis of kidney cancer using a random-effects model, the RR was 1.18 (95% CI, 0.92-1.51). With further reference to kidney cancer, the continuous RR was 1.02 (95% CI, 0.97-1.08), obtained using a random-effects model (p for heterogeneity = 0.03). Using a fixed-effects model, the corresponding RR was 1.02 (95% CI, 0.99-1.06). Breast cancer had the largest number of estimates (_n_ = 7) and cases (_n_ = 16,773). The corresponding RRs were 0.96 (95% CI, 0.91-1.02) for high versus low intake and 1.00 (95% CI, 0.98-1.01) for an increase in intake of 10 µg/day, with no evidence of heterogeneity between estimates. Six estimates were available for prostate (_n_ = 13,559 cases) and colorectal (_n_ = 6,794 cases) cancers. As concerns prostate cancer, both RRs were equal to 1.00, while for colorectal cancer the RRs were 0.94 (95% CI, 0.85-1.04) for high versus low intake and 1.00 (95% CI, 0.98-1.01) for an increase of 10 µg/day. For other cancer sites, the number of cases on which the meta-analyses were based was lower. The summary RRs for high versus low acrylamide intake were 0.87 for oral and pharyngeal (933 cases), 1.14 for esophageal (1,546 cases), 1.03 for stomach (787 cases), 0.93 for pancreatic (1,732 cases), 1.10 for laryngeal (707 cases), 0.88 for lung (3,598 cases), 1.06 for endometrial (2,774 cases), 1.12 for ovarian (2,010 cases), 0.93 for bladder (1,838 cases) cancer and 1.13 for lymphoid malignancies (1,208 cases). All the corresponding continuous estimates ranged between 0.95 and 1.03, and none of them was significant. Within most cancer sites, estimates were fairly homogeneous. Significant heterogeneity between estimates was reported only for cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx (_p_ = 0.08 for high _vs_. low intake, _p_ = 0.07 for the continuous measure), lung (_p_ = 0.002 for high _vs_. low intake, _p_ = 0.04 for the continuous measure), and ovary (_p_ = 0.06 for high _vs_. low intake), besides kidney (_p_ = 0.03 for the continuous measure).  


Table 3 gives the pooled RRs and 95% CIs of selected cancer sites (_i.e_., those for which at least four studies were available) for high versus low dietary acrylamide intake, according to subgroups of study design, smoking status (categorized as never _vs_. ever smokers or never/former _vs_. current smokers, according to which information was mainly reported in the studies of each cancer site) and, for breast cancer, menopausal status and hormone receptor status. The pooled RRs for high versus low acrylamide intake from cohort studies only were 1.01 (95% CI, 0.71-1.43) for esophageal, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.85-1.09) for colorectal, 0.87 (95% CI, 0.71-1.07) for pancreatic, 0.96 (95% CI, 0.90-1.01) for breast, 1.06 (95% CI, 0.92-1.23) for endometrial, 1.20 (95% CI, 0.81-1.79) for ovarian, 1.01 (95% CI, 0.93-1.09) for prostate and 1.48 (95% CI, 1.09-2.00) for kidney cancer. The risk of endometrial (RR = 1.23; 95% CI, 1.00-1.51) and ovarian cancer (RR = 1.39; 95% CI, 0.97-2.00) for high acrylamide intake was of borderline significance in the subgroup of never smoking women. For kidney cancer, the RRs for high versus low acrylamide intake were not materially different in never/former smokers (RR = 1.10; 95% CI, 0.63-1.92) and in current smokers (RR = 1.28; 95% CI, 0.78-2.11). No difference in risk of breast cancer with high acrylamide intake emerged according to menopausal status nor for different hormone receptor cancer types.  


### Discussion

This updated quantitative review of the available evidence on dietary acrylamide and cancer risk confirms previous indications of a lack of association with most cancer sites, as well as of a potential small increase in the risk of kidney cancer, and of endometrial and ovarian cancer in never smoking women, at high levels of acrylamide intake. The findings reported by different studies were generally not heterogeneous, and results were confirmed when only cohort investigation were retained in the analyses. The total number of cancer cases included in this updated meta-analysis was approximately doubled by including the new data released over the last 5 years, mainly from large prospective cohort studies.[2-5, 7-9, 11] Thus, we were able to examine a higher number of cancer sites, as well as to achieve an increased statistical power - with, therefore, narrower CIs for several estimates. This notwithstanding, for some cancer sites the number of studies is still limited.

As concerns kidney cancer, we reported a 20% increase in risk in subjects with high as compared to low dietary acrylamide intake, based on data from three case-control and two cohort studies. Considering only the latter study design, the increase was somewhat higher, that is, about 50%. On the other hand, there was no significant association when the analyses were conducted using a continuous measure of exposure (+2% in risk for an increase of 10 µg/day of dietary acrylamide). The latter analysis was however affected by relevant heterogeneity between study estimates, ranging from 0.91 in a Swedish case-control investigation[17, 30] to 1.10 in the NCS.[21] This may be at least in part explained by different results according to study design with, again, cohort studies reporting moderately higher risk estimates.[9, 21] Smoking is a major risk factor for kidney cancer[41] and a major source of acrylamide exposure, too.[42] Thus, smoking might have a confounding or modifying effect on the relation between dietary acrylamide and kidney cancer. All the five studies included in the meta-analysis of kidney cancer, however, controlled their risk estimates for some measure of tobacco smoking, and when we performed subgroup meta-analyses according to smoking status, we found similar RRs among never/former and current smokers. Limited indications for a potential role of acrylamide exposure on cancer of the kidney were also provided from two occupational cohort studies.[43, 44] Given the modest, borderline significant, association and the still limited amount of epidemiological data on kidney cancer (_i.e_., about 1,800 cases), the issue remains therefore open to discussion.

The main pathway to carcinogenesis of acrylamide is through its oxidization to glycidamide, a chemically reactive genotoxic metabolite.[45] Besides damaging and mutagenic effects on DNA, the existence of other modes of action of acrylamide is supported by the observation of a tissue-specific cancerogenicity in both mice and rats.[46] Acrylamide may also exert a carcinogenic role on selected body sites by affecting hormonal balances.[47] This, together with the findings of animal studies that reported an increased occurrence of mammary gland tumors in rats which were given acrylamide through drinking water,[48, 49] explains the wide interest in investigating the relation with breast, but also endometrial and ovarian, cancer in epidemiological studies.

Our meta-analysis, however, did not report an association with breast cancer risk. In particular, the summary RRs of dietary acrylamide and breast cancer were below unity for high versus low intake, as well as in subgroups of prospective studies, of both never and ever smokers, and of both estrogen receptor positive (ER+)/progesterone receptor positive (PR+) and ER−PR− breast cancers. Two other publications (both from the Danish, Diet, Cancer and Health study)[42, 50] considered acrylamide exposure in relation to breast cancer, but were not included in the present meta-analysis, because: (_i_) the first investigation considered biomarkers of exposure, that is, acrylamide-hemoglobin (Hb) and glycidamide-Hb adducts, but not dietary intake.[42] This study found a positive association between acrylamide-Hb level and ER+ (RR = 2.7; 95% CI, 1.1-6.6, for a 10-fold increase in adduct concentrations) but not ER- breast cancer, the overall RR being 1.9 (95% CI, 0.9-4.0). Results for ER+ breast cancer were lower in nonsmokers (RR = 1.9) than in smokers (RR = 4.9), and a significant increase in breast cancer risk emerged only after careful adjustment for smoking habits, including amount, duration and past smoking. Smokers had over threefold higher levels of acrylamide adducts than nonsmokers, in both cases and controls. The lack of matching of cases and controls on smoking status--which had an important role in that study--makes it, therefore, difficult to interpret the results; (_ii_) the second investigation analyzed the role of prediagnostic biomarkers of acrylamide exposure on survival after a diagnosis of breast cancer.[50] Breast cancer specific mortality increased with increasing adduct levels, particularly in nonsmoking women with ER+ cancer (HR = 1.31, 95% CI, 1.02-1.69, for a 25 pmol/g globin increase in acrylamide-Hb; HR = 2.23, 95% CI, 1.38-3.61, for a 25 pmol/g globin increase in glycidamide-Hb level). Thus, the results on biomarkers of acrylamide exposure of the Danish, Diet, Cancer and Health study[42, 50] indicated significant increases of both ER+ breast cancer risk and mortality, that should be further investigated. This meta-analysis of data on dietary acrylamide, on the other hand, did not find associations with ER+PR+ nor with ER+PR− breast cancer risk.

The role of acrylamide on endometrial and ovarian cancers has been the object of a recent debate.[51-53] In this updated review, we were able to include additional data from the NHS and EPIC (for endometrial cancer only) studies.[4, 5] Still, summary results were close to those of our previous report confirming, overall, an absence of association, but a moderate increase in risk in the subgroup of never smoking women. For ovarian cancer, some caution is needed in the interpretation of results, given the unexplained heterogeneity between estimates. Another study examined data of the NHS and NHS II on ovarian cancer risk according to Hb adduct levels, and was thus not included in the meta-analysis on dietary acrylamide.[6] This reported no association in the complete dataset (RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.50-1.24 for highest versus lowest tertile of combined acrylamide-Hb and glycidamide-Hb adducts) nor in the subgroup of nonsmoking women (RR = 0.84; 95% CI, 0.55-1.27). Overall, epidemiological studies published to date do not support an association between dietary acrylamide intake and major female hormone-related cancers. Associations in specific subgroups, particularly among never smokers for endometrial and ovarian cancers, cannot be excluded,[4] and need further investigation.

With reference to other cancer sites, a considerable amount of data is now available on the role of dietary acrylamide on colorectal and prostate cancers. Overall results do not indicate any excess risk for these cancer sites. For colorectum, however, a recent study reported for the first time differential results for acrylamide and colorectal cancer with specific somatic mutations, with a more than twofold increased risk of cancers with an activating Kirsten-ras (KRAS) mutation in men and a halved risk of cancers with a truncating adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutation in women with high versus low acrylamide intake.[13] To date, specific information on the molecular characteristics of colorectal tumors in relation to acrylamide intake is limited to this investigation. For prostate cancer, one of the studies included in the meta-analysis provided further results for acrylamide-Hb adduct levels, besides dietary intake, reporting no association.[34] As concerns pancreatic cancer, a possible link with acrylamide exposure has been suggested by occupational cohort studies.[1, 43, 44] On the other hand, none of the four epidemiological studies on dietary intake of acrylamide reported any association, and the summary RR of dietary studies was below unity. While no relation emerged in the meta-analysis of lymphoid malignancies as a whole, a positive association was found, in the only study that considered different types of lymphoid malignancies separately,[7] with multiple myeloma and with follicular lymphoma in men. For other cancer sites as well, associations were null or weak, although in some cases based on limited data and/or on heterogeneous risk estimates (such as for lung cancer, where heterogeneity was mainly due to different results in men and women in one study[22]).

Epidemiological studies on dietary acrylamide have been criticized for their alleged inadequacy to address its relation with cancer risk.[54-56] Besides general limitations of cohort and case-control studies, we acknowledge several critical aspects related to this specific topic, including the difficulties in estimating dietary acrylamide intake through food frequency questionnaires and databases of acrylamide content in foods, the lack of repeated exposure estimations over an adequately long time-period, and the lack of statistical power to detect small increases in risk. However, epidemiological studies also have several strengths. In particular, they allow to directly address the relation between acrylamide exposure and cancer risk in humans, avoiding the uncertainties deriving from the use of animal data and mathematical models, and to assess the public health relevance of such a relation.[57] During the last decades, epidemiological studies identified several dietary and nutritional factors associated with the risk of various cancers, particularly those of the digestive tract.[58] This weighs in favor of the capability of epidemiological studies to assess the association with dietary acrylamide. Further, the meta-analytic approach - in the absence of relevant heterogeneity, as was the case for most of the analyses presented here - increases to a great extent the statistical power of the investigation, by joining together the results of several studies.
